Accessing the E-book edition
Using the VitalSource® ebook
Access to the VitalBookTM ebook accompanying this book is
via VitalSource® Bookshelf – an ebook reader which allows
you to make and share notes and highlights on your ebooks
and search across all of the ebooks that you hold on your
VitalSource Bookshelf. You can access the ebook online or
offline on your smartphone, tablet or PC/Mac and your notes
and highlights will automatically stay in sync no matter where
you make them.

DOWNLOAD AND READ OFFLINE
To use your ebook offline, download BookShelf to your PC,
Mac, iOS device, Android device or Kindle Fire, and log in to
your Bookshelf account to access your ebook:

1. Create a VitalSource Bookshelf account at
https://online.vitalsource.com/user/new or log into
your existing account if you already have one.

On your iPhone/iPod Touch/iPad
Download the free VitalSource Bookshelf App available
via the iTunes App Store and log into your Bookshelf
account. You can find more information at https://support.
vitalsource.com/hc/en-us/categories/200134217Bookshelf-for-iOS

2. Redeem the code provided in the panel
below to get online access to the ebook.
Log in to Bookshelf and select Redeem at the top right
of the screen. Enter the redemption code shown on the
scratch-off panel below in the Redeem Code pop-up and
press Redeem. Once the code has been redeemed your
ebook will download and appear in your library.

On your PC/Mac
Go to https://support.vitalsource.com/hc/en-us and
follow the instructions to download the free VitalSource
Bookshelf app to your PC or Mac and log into your
Bookshelf account.

On your Android™ smartphone or tablet
Download the free VitalSource Bookshelf App available
via Google Play and log into your Bookshelf account. You can
find more information at https://support.vitalsource.com/
hc/en-us/categories/200139976-Bookshelf-for-Androidand-Kindle-Fire
On your Kindle Fire
Download the free VitalSource Bookshelf App available
from Amazon and log into your Bookshelf account. You can
find more information at https://support.vitalsource.com/
hc/en-us/categories/200139976-Bookshelf-for-Androidand-Kindle-Fire

No returns if this code has been revealed.

N.B. The code in the scratch-off panel can only be used once.
When you have created a Bookshelf account and redeemed
the code you will be able to access the ebook online or offline
on your smartphone, tablet or PC/Mac.
SUPPORT
If you have any questions about downloading Bookshelf,
creating your account, or accessing and using your ebook
edition, please visit http://support.vitalsource.com/

Clinical Medicine
of the Dog and Cat
Third Edition

K22463_C000.indd 1

25/04/16 11:41 pm

This page intentionally left blank

Clinical Medicine
of the Dog and Cat
Third Edition

Michael Schaer DVM, DipACVIM (SAIM); DipACVECC
Emeritus Professor of Small Animal Medicine;
Adjunct Professor in Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Frédéric Gaschen Dr.med.vet., Dr.habil., DipACVIM (SAIM), DipECVIM-CA (IM)
Professor of Companion Animal Medicine
School of Veterinary Medicine
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA

K22463_C000.indd 3

25/04/16 11:41 pm

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2016 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Version Date: 20160401
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4822-2607-2 (eBook - PDF)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. While all reasonable efforts have been
made to publish reliable data and information, neither the author[s] nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility or liability for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publishers wish to make clear that any views or opinions expressed in this
book by individual editors, authors or contributors are personal to them and do not necessarily reflect the views/opinions of the
publishers. The information or guidance contained in this book is intended for use by medical, scientific or health-care professionals and is provided strictly as a supplement to the medical or other professional’s own judgement, their knowledge of the patient’s
medical history, relevant manufacturer’s instructions and the appropriate best practice guidelines. Because of the rapid advances
in medical science, any information or advice on dosages, procedures or diagnoses should be independently verified. The reader
is strongly urged to consult the relevant national drug formulary and the drug companies’ and device or material manufacturers’
printed instructions, and their websites, before administering or utilizing any of the drugs, devices or materials mentioned in this
book. This book does not indicate whether a particular treatment is appropriate or suitable for a particular individual. Ultimately
it is the sole responsibility of the medical professional to make his or her own professional judgements, so as to advise and treat
patients appropriately. The authors and publishers have also attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced
in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright
material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any
form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400.
CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been
granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification
and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

Dedications
To MJ, my wife, who has supported me through thick and thin throughout my entire career; to my colleagues and
­contributing authors who have provided me encouragement and who have instilled their wisdom throughout this
­textbook; and to my house officers and students who have provided me with endless inspiration - I thank you all
for allowing me to make my career my everyday passion. Lastly but certainly not least, I offer my special thanks to
Drs. Bill Kay, Glen Hoffsis, Jim Lloyd, Tom Vickroy, Boyd Jones, and Rowan Milner, who provided me with the opportunity and encouragement to propel myself forward toward a continuing productive life during the golden years of
my career.
Michael Schaer

“If you decide to become a veterinary surgeon you will never grow rich, but you will have a life of endless interest and variety”
(James Herriot)
To Lorrie, Alec, Betty, Gaston, and Louis with my love and gratitude for their support and encouragements at different
times of my life - I know I owe them everything.
To those who have taken the time and energy to mentor me at different times of my career - with my never ending
appreciation for your selfless investment
To the residents, interns, and students I had or currently have the privilege to work with for being a constant source of
motivation and energy
To James Herriot for first opening my eyes on this great profession of ours.
And finally to Mike Schaer, for inviting me to share the helm for the 3rd edition of his book, and to all the authors who
worked hard to make its content so relevant to our readers.
Frédéric Gaschen

K22463_C000.indd 5

25/04/16 11:41 pm

This page intentionally left blank

vii

Contents

Prefaceix
Contributorsxi
Abbreviationsxv

Part 1

General approach

Chapter 1
Chapter 2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
2.10
2.11
2.12

Medical history and client communication
3
Stephanie W. Johnson
Common clinical problems
11
Dyspnea (Elizabeth Rozanski)11
Syncope, episodic weakness, and collapse (Boyd R. Jones)17
Pigmenturia (Michael Schaer)23
Vomiting (Frédéric Gaschen)27
Polydipsia and polyuria (Michael Schaer)33
Diarrhea (Frédéric Gaschen)39
Icterus ( Julien Dandrieux)47
Cough (Elizabeth Rozanski)53
Epistaxis (Christine Iacovetta)57
Fever of unknown origin (Robert Armentano)61
Dysuria (Isabelle Cattin)69
Pallor (Elisa M. Mazzaferro)77

Part 2

Diseases of specific organ systems81

Chapter 3

Diseases of the oral cavity and teeth
Erin P. Ribka & Brook A. Niemiec
Respiratory disorders
Cécile Clercx
Diseases of the pleural space
J. Brad Case
Approach to thoracic radiographs
L. Abbigail Granger
Cardiovascular disorders
Romain Pariaut & Carley Saelinger
Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)
Frédéric Gaschen
Liver disorders
Joseph Taboada

Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9

K22463_C000.indd 7

1

83
105
139
157
195
253
333

25/04/16 11:41 pm

viii

Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
Chapter 19

Contents

Pancreatic disorders
Michael Schaer
Endocrine disorders
Michael E. Herrtage
Nephrology/urology
Mark J. Acierno
Approach to abdominal radiographs
L. Abbigail Granger
Disorders of the nervous system and muscle
Simon R. Platt
Bone and joint disorders
Steven M. Fox
Hematologic disorders
Katie M. Boes & Rose E. Raskin
Disorders of hemostasis
Bobbi Conner
Dermatologic disorders
Diane T. Lewis
Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases
Dennis E. Brooks & Megan L. Sullivan

Part 3

Multisystemic disorders

Chapter 20

Clinical toxicology
Lisa A. Murphy & Kenneth J. Drobatz
Infectious diseases
Richard B. Ford & Annette Litster
Immunologic disorders
Michael J. Day

Chapter 21
Chapter 22

Part 4

Elements of therapy

Chapter 23

Fluid therapy
Gareth Buckley & Travis Lanaux
Pain management
Steven M. Fox
Nutrition of the critically-ill dog and cat
Justin Shmalberg
Management of the obese dog or cat
Alexander J. German

Chapter 24
Chapter 25
Chapter 26

Appendix

Clinical cases

361
387
449
511
545
637
681
745
769
821

877
879
909
985

1009
1011
1025
1059
1079

1095

Index1129

K22463_C000.indd 8

25/04/16 11:41 pm

ix

Preface

Before the first edition of Clinical Medicine of the Dog
and Cat was published, no other comprehensive small
animal veterinary medicine textbook was available with
a comparable amount and quality of relevant illustrated
materials. The information in the 1st and 2nd editions
was carefully selected so that it would be a great resource
offering clinically applicable information for the veterinary student, the small animal intern, and the general
practitioner. It complemented our belief that clinical
observation and the cognitive sense of the clinician are
essential professional qualities that contribute to our
­clinical acumen.
In the 1st and 2nd editions, the editor (MS) carefully
selected experienced specialists from North America,
Europe, and Australasia with the distinctive objective of
providing the book with quality material that would have
a truly international appeal. Soon after the publication
of the 1st edition there were requests for additional topics, and the 2nd edition was expanded to include sections
covering pain management, clinical nutrition, clinical
toxicology, fluid therapy, and clinical immunology, and
authored by recognized experts in their field.
Because of the overall success of the first two editions,
it was decided to publish a 3rd edition. This time, however, it was deemed essential to appoint a co-editor (FG)
who would be a resource for new ideas regarding the contents. The new team of editors has brought forth fresh
ideas, which include new chapter topics and several new
outstanding authors.
This new 3rd edition is composed of two main sections. The first elaborates on the medical approach to
solving common medical problems. These additional
short topics, written by experts, include medical history
taking, polydipsia and polyuria, pigmenturia, vomiting,
diarrhea, weakness, dyspnea, cough, fever of unknown
origin, epistaxis, and pallor. The practical application of
the information in these sections is presented with text,
tables, and algorithms. The objective of this clinical problems section is merely to emphasize the logical clinical
approach to the selected clinical signs.

K22463_C000.indd 9

The second section contains detailed medical information covering most organ systems. The Appendix contains selected clinical case material that applies some of
the principles of medicine discussed in this textbook. The
new chapters are authored by experienced specialists,
and cover new topics or provide a completely rewritten
approach to chapters included in previous editions of the
book. They include diseases of the oral cavity and teeth,
respiratory diseases, approach to thoracic radiographs,
approach to abdominal radiographs, neuromuscular
disorders, cardiovascular disorders, digestive diseases,
uro-nephrology, and disorders of hemostasis. Other chapters from the 2nd edition have been revised by their
authors with the inclusion of additional text and images.
The editors adhered to the original organizational plan
of Clinical Medicine of the Dog and Cat, which was to cover
disorders of all organ systems as well as the associated
subspecialties of veterinary internal medicine. However,
in order to make this a practical text for our projected
audience, we omitted certain valuable topics such as
genetics, preventive medicine, and coverage of the reproductive system. These areas are instead included as a part
of the organ systems chapters where indicated. Ophthalmology and dermatology certainly have enough information to fill books in their own right. Therefore, the editors
requested that the information provided be restricted to
what would most likely impact on internal medicine.
The updated chapter covering pain management was
deemed essential because it is now a major component of
patient management. This is especially true for cats and
dogs with neurologic and orthopedic diseases associated
with acute or chronic pain. However, pain management
is also of central importance in the treatment of acute
pancreatitis and many other conditions that can cause
visceral pain.
As in the first two editions, each chapter of this text
is arranged to provide the definition of each disorder, its
clinical features, the differential diagnoses, the d
­ iagnostic
methodology, and the treatment and prognosis. The aim
remains to achieve brevity and clarity in order to pro-

23/04/16 12:39 pm

x

Preface

vide the practicing veterinarian with a readily available
resource of important clinical information. The n
­ umerous
illustrations fulfill the main philosophy of this textbook,
namely that ‘a picture is worth a thousand words’, which
is especially useful in the practice of veterinary medicine.
Each author was requested to restrict his or her content
to the more commonly seen clinical disorders, but was
allowed to exercise as much freedom of choice as possible.
A limited list of recommended references is offered in this
latest edition. With today’s readily available access to literature search engines, we feel that the reader can easily
find unlimited information for further detailed reading.
We would like to express our sincere appreciation to
the several talented people who helped organize this
text. First, Ms. Jill Northcott, our publisher’s coordinator,
whose guidance enabled the various contributors to work
harmoniously together in order to design the content of
a book that would provide the broadest possible coverage of small animal internal medicine. We would also
like to thank the production staff at CRC Press, led by the
project manager, Ms. Kate Nardoni, who worked behind
the scenes to provide the reader with the best possible
page layout and the easiest possible access to the import-

K22463_C000.indd 10

ant information contained therein. We express our very
special thanks to Mr. Peter Beynon and Mr. Paul Bennett,
whose medical literary expertise provide the fine tuning
necessary for making the book’s content clearly understandable and balanced. Finally, we express our sincere
gratitude to our wonderful and gifted authors for taking
valuable time out of their very busy days to share their
expertise with the readers of this 3rd edition.
The authors and editors acknowledge and appreciate
the patience and understanding of their families and
other important people in their lives. We thank them for
providing the moral support and accepting the sacrifices
that were necessary for successful completion of this new
edition. We are also indebted to all of the helpful individuals who provided time and assistance with each author’s
respective assignments.
We hope that you, the readers, will truly enjoy using
this textbook, and that the information provided will be
of assistance in your day-to-day practice of veterinary
medicine.
Michael Schaer and Frédéric Gaschen

25/04/16 11:41 pm

xi

Contributors

Mark J. Acierno MBA, DVM, DipACVIM(SAIM)
School of Veterinary Medicine
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Lousiana, USA
Robert Armentano DVM, DipACVIM(SAIM)
Veterinary Specialty Center
Small Animal Internal Medicine
Chicago, Illinois, USA
Katie M. Boes DVM, MS, DipACVP
Department of Biomedical Sciences and
Pathobiology
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
Dennis E. Brooks DVM, PhD, DipACVO
University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Gareth Buckley MA, VetMB, DipACVECC, DipECVECC
University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Jessica Bullock DVM
University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Sheila Justiz-Carrera DVM, DipACVIM(Neurology)
University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gainesville, Florida, USA
J. Brad Case DVM, MS, DipACVS-SA
University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gainesville, Florida, USA

K22463_C000.indd 11

Isabelle Cattin Dr.med.vet., DipACVIM(SAIM)
VET’Interne
Epalinges, Switzerland
Cécile Clercx DVM, PhD, DipECVIM-CA
Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire
Université de Liège
Liège, Belgium
Bobbi Conner DVM, DipACVECC
University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Julien Dandrieux Dr.med.vet., BSc, DipACVIM(SAIM)
Faculty of Veterinary Science
Small Animal Hospital
University of Melbourne
Werribee, Victoria, Australia
Rachel B. Davy DVM
University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Michael J. Day BSc, BVMS(Hons), PhD, DSc, DipECVP, FASM,
FRCPath, FRCVS
School of Veterinary Sciences
University of Bristol
Langford, Bristol, UK
Kenneth J. Drobatz DVM, MSCE, DipACVIM, DipACVECC
School of Veterinary Medicine
Department of Clinical Studies
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Richard B. Ford DVM, DipACVIM, DipACVPM
Emerywood Drive
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA

23/04/16 12:39 pm

xii

Contributors

Steven M. Fox MS, DVM, MBA, PhD
Fox Third Bearing Inc.
Forest Ave
Clive, Iowa, USA

Diane T. Lewis DVM, DipACVD
University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gainesville, Florida, USA

Frédéric Gaschen Dr.med.vet., Dr.habil., DipACVIM(SAIM),
DipECVIM-CA (IM)
School of Veterinary Medicine
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA

Annette Litster BVSc, PhD, FANZCVSc, MMedSci
Emerywood Drive
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA

Alexander J. German BVSc, PhD, CertSAM, DipECVIM-CA,
MRCVS
School of Veterinary Science
University of Liverpool
Neston, Cheshire, UK
L. Abbigail Granger DVM, DipACVR
School of Veterinary Medicine
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA
Michael E. Herrtage MA, BVSc, DVSc, DVR, DVD, DSAM,
MRCVS, DipECVIM, DipECVDI
Department of Veterinary Medicine
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK

Leo Londoño DVM
University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Elisa M. Mazzaferro MS, DVM, PhD, DipACVECC
Cornell University Veterinary Specialists
Stamford, Connecticut, USA
Lisa A. Murphy BS, VMD, DABT
School of Veterinary Medicine
Department of Clinical Studies
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Brook A. Niemiec DVM, DipAVDC, DipEVDC, FAVD
Veterinary Dental Specialties & Oral Surgery
San Diego, California, USA

Christine Iacovetta BVetMed, DipACVECC
BluePearl Veterinary Partners
Forest Hills
New York, USA

Romain Pariaut DVM, DipACVIM(CA), DipECVIM-CA
College of Veterinary Medicine
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York, USA

Stephanie W. Johnson LCSW
School of Veterinary Medicine
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA

Simon R. Platt BVM&S, DipACVIM(Neurology), DipECVN
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia, USA

Boyd R. Jones BVSc, FACVS, DECVIM, MRCVS
Kauri Point
Katikati, New Zealand

Rose E. Raskin DVM, PhD, DipACVP
College of Veterinary Medicine
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA

Travis Lanaux DVM, DipACVECC
University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gainesville, Florida, USA

Erin P. Ribka DVM
Gulf South Veterinary Dentistry & Oral Surgery
New Orleans, Louisiana, USA

Amandine LeJeune DVM
University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gainesville, Florida, USA

Elodie Roels DVM
Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire
Université de Liège
Liège, Belgium

K22463_C000.indd 12

25/04/16 11:41 pm

Contributors

Elizabeth Rozanski DVM, DipACVIM(SAIM), DipACVECC
Tufts University
North Grafton, Massachusetts, USA
Carley Saelinger VMD, DipACVIM(CA)
Animal Specialty and Emergency Center
Los Angeles, California, USA
Michael Schaer DVM, DipACVIM(SAIM), DipACVECC
University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gainesville, Florida, USA

K22463_C000.indd 13

xiii

Justin Shmalberg DVM, DipACVN, DAVSMR, CVA, CVCH, CVFT
University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Joseph Taboada DVM, DipACVIM(SAIM)
School of Veterinary Medicine
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA

25/04/16 11:41 pm

This page intentionally left blank

xv

Abbreviations

AA
arachidonic acid
a2AP
alpha2-antiplasmin
ACE
angiotensin-converting enzyme
ACEI
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor
ACM
arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy
AChR acetylcholine receptor
ACP
acepromazine maleate
ACTH adrenocorticotrophic hormone
AD
atopic dermatitis
ADE
adverse drug event
ADH
antidiuretic hormone
ADP
adenosine diphosphate
AF
atrial fibrillation
AGDD agar gel double diffusion
AHDS acute hemorrhagic diarrhea syndrome
AKI
acute kidney injury
albB
bilirubin covalently bound to albumin
ALD
acral lick dermatitis
ALP
alkaline phosphatase
ALT
alanine transaminase
AML
acute myeloid leukemia
AMPA	alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-isoxazole4-proprionic acid
ANA
antinuclear antibody
APC
antigen-presenting cell
AR
aldose reductase
ARD
antibiotic-responsive diarrhea
ARVC arrhythmogenic right ventricular ­cardiomyopathy
ASD
atrial septal defect
ASIC
acid-sensing ion channel
ASIT
allergen-specific immunotherapy
AST
aspartate transaminase
AT
antithrombin
ATP
adenosine triphosphate
AV
atrioventricular
AZT
azidothymidine
BAL
bronchoalveolar lavage
BAOS brachycephalic airway obstructive syndrome
BCR
B-cell receptor
BCS
body condition score
BEF
bronchoesophageal fistula
BMI
body mass index

K22463_C000.indd 15

bpm
beats per minute/breaths per minute
BUN
blood urea nitrogen
CAPC Companion Animal Parasite Council
CAV
canine adenovirus
cB
conjugated bilirubin
CBC
complete blood count
CCV
canine coronavirus
CD
cluster of differentiation
CDI
central diabetes insipidus
CDV
canine distemper virus
CE
chronic enteropathy
CGRP calcitonin gene-related peptide
CH
chronic hepatitis
CHD
congenital heart disease
Che
cholinesterase
CHF
congestive heart failure
CHOP 	cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin [doxorubicin], Oncovin [vincristine], and prednisone
CIDP	chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy
CILBD chronic idiopathic large bowel diarrhea
CIRD
canine infectious respiratory disease
CIV
canine influenza virus
CK
creatine kinase
CKCS
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
CKD
chronic kidney disease
CLAD canine leukocyte adhesion deficiency
CLE
cutaneous (discoid) lupus erythematosus
CLL
chronic lymphocytic leukemia
CLMS Chiari-like malformation syndrome
CMI
cell-mediated immunity
CNS
central nervous system
COPV canine oral papillomavirus
CoT
coagulopathy of trauma
COX
cyclo-oxygenase
CPiV
canine parainfluenza virus
CPnV canine pneumovirus
CPV
canine parvovirus
CRCoV canine respiratory coronavirus
CRH
corticotropin-releasing hormone
CRI
constant rate infusion
CRP
corrected reticulocyte percentage

25/04/16 11:41 pm

xvi

Abbreviations

CRT
capillary refill time
CRTZ
chemoreceptor trigger zone
CSD
cat scratch disease
CSF
cerebrospinal fluid
CT
computed tomography
cTnI
cardiac troponin I
c-TSH canine thyroid-stimulating hormone
CVP
central venous pressure
DAWS disk-associated wobbler syndrome
DCM
dilated cardiomyopathy
DEA
dog erythrocyte antigen
DEXA dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry
DIIHA drug-induced immune hemolytic anemia
DJD
degenerative joint disease
DM
degenerative myelopathy
DMSO dimethyl sulfoxide
DOC
disorder of cornification
DOI
duration of immunity
2,3-DPG 2,3-diphosphoglycerate
DRD
diet-responsive diarrhea
DRG
dorsal root ganglion
DTM
dermatophyte test medium
EACA epsilon aminocaproic acid
EBDO extrahapatic bile duct obstruction
EBP
eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy
ECG
electrocardiogram/electrocardiography
EE
energy expenditure
EEG
electroencephalogram
EGC
eosinophilic granuloma complex
EIC
exercise-induced collapse
ELISA enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
EM
erythema multiforme
EMG
electromyogram/electromyography
EPI
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
EPO
erythropoietin
ER
exertional rhabdomyolysis
EU
ectopic ureter
FB
foreign body
FCEM fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy
FCP
fragmented coronoid process
FCV
feline calicivirus
FDA
(US) Food and Drug Administration
FDP
fibrin degradation product
FECV
feline enteric coronavirus
FeLV
feline leukemia virus
FHV
feline herpesvirus
FIC
feline idiopathic cystitis
FIP
feline infectious peritonitis
FIV
feline immunodeficiency virus
FLAIR fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
FLUTD feline lower urinary tract disease

K22463_C000.indd 16

FPL
feline panleukopenia
fPLI
feline pancreatic lipase (test)
FPV
feline panleukopenia virus
FS
shortening fraction
FUO
fever of undetermined origin
GABA gamma-aminobutyric acid
GAG
glycosaminoglycan
GC
granulomatous colitis
GCS
Glasgow Coma Scale
G-CSF granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
GDV
gastric dilatation volvulus
GFR
glomerular filtration rate
GGT
gamma-glutamyltransferase
GH
growth hormone
GI
gastrointestinal
GM-CSF	granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating
factor
GME
granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
GN
glomerulonephritis
GP
glycoprotein
GS
glucagonoma syndrome
HARD heartworm associated respiratory disease
HCM
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
HCS
hepatocutaneous syndrome
Hct
hematocrit
HGAL high-grade alimentary lymphoma
Hgb
hemoglobin
HGE
hemorrhagic gastroenteritis
HH
hiatal hernia
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus
HOD
hypertrophic osteodystrophy
HP
pulmonary hypertension
HUC
histiocytic ulcerative colitis
IAC
intracranial arachnoid cyst
IBD
inflammatory bowel disease
ICH
infectious canine hepatitis
ICP
intracranial pressure
IDAT
intradermal allergy testing/test
IDST
intradermal skin test
IFA
immunofluorescent antibody (test)
IFN
interferon
IGF-1 insulin-like growth factor-1
IL
interleukin
IM
intramuscular/intramuscularly
IMHA immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
IMNP immune-mediated neutropenia
IMTP
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
IPF
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
IPPV
intermittent positive pressure ventilation
IV
intravenous/intravenously
IVDD
intervertebral disk disease

25/04/16 11:41 pm

Abbreviations

KCS
keratoconjunctivitis sicca
LA/Ao
left atrium to aortic ratio
LCAT
latex cryptococcal antigen agglutination test
LDDST
low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
LDH
lactate dehydrogenase
LES
lower esophageal sphincter
LGAL
low-grade alimentary lymphoma
LH
luteinizing hormone
LMN
lower motor neuron
LMWH
low molecular weight heparin
LRT
lower respiratory tract
LVIDd
left ventricular diameter in end-diastole
LVIDs
left ventricular diameter in end-systole
LVOTO
left ventricular outflow tract obstruction
MABP
mean arterial blood pressure
MAP
mean arterial pressure
MAT
microscopic agglutination test
MBW
metabolic body weight
MCH
mean cell hemoglobin
MCHC
mean cell hemoglobin concentration
MCP
mucocutaneous pyoderma
MCS
muscle condition score
MCT
mast cell tumor
MCV
mean cell volume
MDS
myelodysplastic syndrome
ME
megaesophagus
MER
maintenance energy requirement
ME-RSAT	2–mercaptoethanol rapid slide agglutination
test
MG
myasthenia gravis
MH
malignant hyperthermia
MHC
major histocompatibility complex
MIC
minimum inhibitory concentration
MLV
modified live virus (vaccine)
MM
multiple myeloma
MMA
methylmalonic acid
MMM
masticatory muscle myositis
MN
membranous nephropathy
MPGN
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
MPN
myeloproliferative neoplasia
MPS
mucopolysaccharidosis
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
MSM
methyl-sulfonyl-methane
MST
median survival time
MTP
membrane transfer protein
MVD
mitral valve dysplasia
NAPQI
N-acetyl p-benzoquinoneimine
NDI
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
NGF
nerve growth factor
NI
neonatal isoerythrolysis
NK
natural killer (cell)

K22463_C000.indd 17

xvii

NMDA
N-methyl-D-aspartate
NME
necrolytic migratory erythema
NNT
number needed to treat
NO
nitric oxide
nRBC
nucleated red blood cell
NSAID
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
NT-proBNP	
nonbiologically active fragment of the
B-type natriuretic peptide
OA
osteoarthritis
OCD
osteochondritis dissecans
OE
otitis externa
OMI
otitis media/interna
OP
organophosphate
PAI-1
plasminogen activator inhibitor 1
2-PAM
protopam chloride or pralidoxime chloride
PAMP
pathogen-associated molecular pattern
PAS
periodic acid–Schiff
PCD
primary ciliary dyskinesia
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
PCT
proximal convoluted tubule
PCV
packed cell volume
PDA
patent ductus arteriosus
PDH
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
PFK
phosphofructokinase
PGE2
prostaglandin E2
PH
pulmonary hypertension
PIVKA 	proteins induced by vitamin K antagonism
or absence
PK
pyruvate kinase
PKD
polycystic kidney disease
PLE
protein-losing enteropathy
PLI
pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (test)
PLN
protein-losing nephropathy
PMEA
phosphonylmethoxy­-ethyladenine
PMI
point of maximal intensity
PO
per os/orally
POI
postoperative ileus
PNS
peripheral nervous system
PNST
peripheral nerve sheath tumor
PP
psychogenic polydipsia
PPDH
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia
PPI
proton pump inhibitor
PPR	pattern recognition receptor
PRAA	­persistent right aortic arch
PRCA
pure red cell aplasia
PS
pulmonic stenosis
PSS
portosystemic shunt
PT
prothrombin time
PTE
pulmonary thromboembolism
PTH
parathyroid hormone
PTHrP
parathyroid hormone-related peptide

25/04/16 11:41 pm

xviii

Abbreviations

PTT
partial thromboplastin time
PV
polycythemia vera
qPCR quantitative PCR
RAAS renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system
RBC
red blood cell
RCM
restrictive cardiomyopathy
RD
retinal detachment
REE
resting energy expenditure
RER
resting energy requirement
RF
rheumatoid factor
rHuEPO recombinant human erythropoietin
RMSF Rocky Mountain spotted fever
RPE
retinal pigment epithelium
rT3
reverse triiodothyronine (T3)
RT-PCR reverse transcriptase PCR
RVESP right ventricular end-systolic pressure
SAA
serum amyloid A
SAMe S-adenosylmethionine
SAS
subaortic stenosis
SC
subcutaneous/subcutaneously
SCC
squamous cell carcinoma
SCID
severe combined immunodeficiency
SD
sorbitol dehydrogenase
SFG
spotted fever group
SG
specific gravity
SIRS
systemic inflammatory response syndrome
SJS
Stevens–Johnson syndrome
SLE
systemic lupus erythematosus
SM
syringomyelia
SNA
sinonasal aspergillosis
SOA
sino-orbital aspergillosis
SRI
serotonin reuptake inhibitor
SRID
single radial immunodiffusion
SRMA steroid-responsive meningitis–arteritis
T3
triiodothyronine
T4
thyroxine
TAFI
thrombin activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor
TAT
tube agglutination test
Tc
T cytotoxic (cell)
TCA
tricyclic antidepressant
TCR
T-cell receptor
TEN
toxic epidermal necrolysis
TENS transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation

K22463_C000.indd 18

TF
tissue factor
TgAA thyroglobulin autoantibodies
Th
T helper (cell)
THO
thrombopoietin
TLI
trypsin-like immunoreactivity (test)
TLR
Toll-like receptor
TMJ
temporomandibular joint
TNCC total nucleated cell count
TNF
tumor necrosis factor
TOF
tetralogy of Fallot
tPA
tissue-type plasminogen activator
Treg
T regulatory cell
TRs
tooth resorptions
TRH
thyrotropin releasing hormone
TRPV1 transient receptor potential vanilloid-1
TS
total solids
TSH
thyroid-stimulating hormone
TVD
tricuspid valve dysplasia
TW
tracheal wash
TXA
tranexamic acid
UAP
ununited anconeal process
uB
unconjugated bilirubin
UES
upper esophageal sphincter
UH
unfractionated heparin
UMN
upper motor neuron
uPA
urokinase/urine-type plasminogen activator
UPC
urine protein:creatinine (ratio)
URT
upper respiratory tract
USG
urine specific gravity
UTI
urinary tract infection
UV
ultraviolet
VAS
vaccine-associated sarcoma
VHCT veterinary health care team
VHS
vertebral heart scale
VSD
ventricular septal defect
VS-FCV virulent systemic feline calicivirus
vWD
von Willebrand disease
vWF
von Willebrand factor
VKH
Vogt–Koyanagi–Harada
WBC
white blood cell
WHO World Health Organization
X-SCID X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency

25/04/16 11:41 pm

1

Part 1
General approach
Chapter 1

Medical history and client communication
Stephanie W. Johnson

Chapter 2
2.1
2.2

Common clinical problems
Dyspnea (Elizabeth Rozanski)
Syncope, episodic weakness, and collapse
(Boyd R. Jones)
2.3 Pigmenturia (Michael Schaer)
2.4 Vomiting (Frédéric Gaschen)
2.5 Polydipsia and polyuria (Michael Schaer)
2.6 Diarrhea (Frédéric Gaschen)
2.7 Icterus (Julien Dandrieux)
2.8 Cough (Elizabeth Rozanski)
2.9 Epistaxis (Christine Iacovetta)
2.10 Fever of unknown origin (Robert Armentano)
2.11 Dysuria (Isabelle Cattin)
2.12 Pallor (Elisa M. Mazzaferro)

K22463_C001.indd 1

25/04/16 9:40 am

This page intentionally left blank

3

Chapter 1
Medical history and client communication
Stephanie W. Johnson

INTRODUCTION
A good history contributes 60–80% of the data needed
to make an accurate diagnosis. Information obtained
from conversations/history taking between the veterinarian and the client is the basis for a clinical diagnosis. The history contains the biomedical information and
background information about the pet. It is also vital to
understand the ‘story’ or the client’s perspective. Many
times the story the client shares about their pet is just
as important as the biomedical history. It gives the veterinarian a basis for what to ask next and a chance to
understand/appreciate where clients are coming from
and what concerns them most. In order to get an effective history, the veterinarian needs to be able to elicit the
story from the client, therefore he/she needs to be a good
communicator. Practicing good communication is essential to practicing good medicine.
Communication is the act or process of using words,
sounds, signs, or behaviors to express or exchange information or to effectively express your ideas, thoughts,
feelings, etc. to someone else. Communication skills
are critical to eliciting information and understanding
each other. In human medicine, effective doctor–patient
communication has been shown to improve diagnostic
accuracy, health status, patient compliance, and patient
satisfaction. It also decreases malpractice risk; ‘breakdown of communication’ is the main reason for veterinary malpractice claims. Good communication also
enhances supportiveness, relationships, and coordination of care. It makes it possible to enlist the client as a
member of the veterinary health care team (VHCT). The
more the clients feel a member of the team, the more
motivated and invested they will be in participating in
their pet’s care. The better the communication, the more
satisfied the veterinarian. Research has shown that veterinarian satisfaction is achieved through relationship
building with clients.
The most important role of the VHCT is to elicit and
understand the client’s story. Without this understanding,
the veterinarian cannot do what needs to be done for the

K22463_C001.indd 3

pet or the client. The most basic form of communication
is nonverbal. Sometimes it is not just what you say but
how you say it. Any problems the client might be having
relative to the VHCT will be exhibited through nonverbal
cues regardless of whether he/she agrees verbally with
the treatment/discussion. Correct interpretation of nonverbal communication will add depth to the veterinarian’s ability to communicate. This stresses the importance
of the team member looking at the pet owner instead of
a computer screen so that body language is used to assist
with interpreting the verbal message.
In order to obtain the story, members of the VHCT must
be able to engage and empathize with the client. Learning
to use open-ended questions and reflective listening skills
is important to client engagement. Acknowledgment of
what is seen, removal of barriers, imagining the experience through the eyes of the client, and use of nonjudgmental/normalizing language are the skills needed to
convey empathy to clients. It is revealing that client satisfaction is more highly correlated with how the owner
is treated as opposed to how the animal is treated. The
desire of the owner to be treated and respected as an individual and the veterinarian’s need for information suggest that clients should also be thought of as patients.

THE HISTORY
When taking a history, the objective is to obtain a
chronological narrative from the client including all
­
the actions, events, and behaviors of the pet leading up to the current presenting problem. A good history includes biomedical data, the client’s perspective,
and background information relative to the pet and
the ­
client. Biomedical data includes the presenting
­complaint, ­timing of events, defining of clinical signs,
and a review of body systems. The client’s perspective
includes ­concerns, which may not be the same as the
veterinarian’s; ideas and beliefs; expectations, which
­
again may not be the same as the veterinarian’s; repercussions on daily and future living; and feelings about it
all. The background history includes all previous medical

25/04/16 9:40 am

4

General approach

1.1

Figure 1.1 The consultation. (Courtesy White Oak Veterinary
Hospital)

history including surgeries, medications, preventive
medicine, and ­lifestyle/­husbandry information. In order
to gather all this information, the veterinarian must
employ a thoughtful communication approach. The veterinarian needs to pay attention to his/her surroundings
and set the stage. He/she also needs to pay attention to
nonverbal behavior (his/her own and the client’s), utilize
engagement and enlistment skills, and provide a structure and organization to the meeting that will aid in the
closing and negotiation relative to contracting the next
steps in the treatment plan (Figure 1.1).

Basic communication skills
Setting the stage
Before the client enters the examination room, the veterinarian should take stock of himself/herself and the surroundings. Pet owners can learn much about you based on
the physical space that surrounds you. A clinic can claim
to be ‘bond-centered’, but if the VHCT neglects to convey
the importance of the human–animal bond through the
appearance of the clinic, the communication will be much
less believable. Setting the stage starts with the outside of
the clinic, which should present as clean and professional.
Inside, the waiting area should be clean, comfortable, and
well lit. Soothing colors should adorn the walls. A display
of staff along with their roles is helpful to clients; it makes
it easy to place a face with a name and creates an additional welcome. Information pamphlets should be made
available along with perhaps a computer with access to
websites recommended for educational information.
The examination room should be kept simple yet comfortable (Figure 1.2). Too much clutter is distracting and
appears disorganized. Tables, equipment, computers, and
other technology sometimes create a distance that may
be desirable to the VHCT member because it provides a
sense of safety through a physical barrier. Unfortunately,

K22463_C001.indd 4

1.2

Figure 1.2 The examination room. (Courtesy White Oak
Veterinary Hospital)

too much distance makes it difficult to connect with the
client. If the veterinarian wants to engage with the client,
the barriers need to be eliminated or, at the very least,
one must learn to work around them. Standing on the
same side of the table as the client, sitting on the floor
with the client and his/her animal, and even using a tablet instead of a stationary computer are good examples
of minimizing physical barriers. Whenever possible, the
VHCT member should be at the same or below the client’s
height (Figure 1.3).
Veterinarians also need to consider their physical appearance when setting the stage. A coat and tie
are not indispensable, but the veterinarian should be
dressed neatly, with crisp clothes free of stains. A white
coat is practical because if it becomes soiled during an
encounter with an animal, the coat can be changed
­
instead of ­changing clothes. The coat also sets a person
as the ­veterinarian. Many veterinarians wear variations
of ‘white coats’ such as a fleece pullover or polo shirt
with their name and the clinic’s name embroidered on

1.3

Figure 1.3 Vertical height example. (Courtesy White Oak
Veterinary Hospital)

25/04/16 9:40 am

Medical history and client communication

the front. Coats stained with blood, urine, feces, and any
other body fluids should be changed before entering a
room with a client, as this often reflects negatively in the
client’s mind. Veterinarians should also minimize personal distractions when they are spending time with a
client. Cell phones or digital pagers must be turned off,
and staff should be instructed only to interrupt if necessary. If an interruption is anticipated, whether business
or personal, the client should be alerted to this possibility
up front. Enough time should be allotted for the consultation so that the veterinarian can focus on the client’s
story rather than what they need to do, could be doing, or
their next appointment or surgery.

Nonverbal behavior
Nonverbal communication is the process of communicating through sending and receiving wordless messages.
Important information is exchanged at all times, much of
it involuntarily. Since approximately 80% of communication is nonverbal, it is imperative that VHCT members pay
attention to their client’s nonverbal cues as well as their
own. Nonverbal communication is conveyed through
gesture and touch, by body language or posture, and by
facial expression and eye contact. Cues also include voice
quality, emotion and speaking style, as well as features
such as rhythm, intonation, and stress. Nonverbal behavior reflects a person’s feelings more accurately and adds
meaning to what is being said. Nonverbal communication can:

●● Repeat the message the person is making verbally.
●● Contradict a message the individual is trying to
convey.
●● Substitute for a verbal message.
●● Add to or complement a verbal message.
●● Accent or underline a verbal message.
It is important to be able to identify/read nonverbal
behavior in order to recognize when communication is
effective or when the veterinarian is missing s­ omething.
There are four categories of nonverbal communication: kinesics, proxemics, paralanguage, and autonomic
change:

●● Kinesics includes facial expressions, body tension,
gestures, and body positioning and body movement.
These are behaviors over which each person has
some control.
●● Proxemics includes how space is shaped between
interacting individuals. This ‘space shaping’ looks
at spatial relationships such as height differences,

K22463_C001.indd 5

5

interpersonal distance, and angles of facing. Barriers
are also included in the proxemics category, covering
issues such as charts, examination tables, and perhaps the animal itself. Space shaping was discussed
earlier (Setting the stage).
●● Paralanguage involves all the elements of voice.
These elements include voice tone, rate, rhythm,
volume, and emphasis. All of these elements can
­
be used to deliver very different messages with the
same words. People ‘read’ each other’s voices as they
listen to their words. For example, a tone of voice can
imply sarcasm, anger, affection, or confidence.
●● Autonomic changes include those behaviors driven by
the autonomic nervous system, over which a ­person
has little or no control: flushing, blanching, tearing, sweating, changes in breathing, changes in
pupil size, or involuntary swallowing. These changes
often i­ndicate that the person being observed is
­experiencing strong feelings relative to the present
conversation. When a client displays these signs, it
might be best to stop and ask how they are doing.
When considering nonverbal behavior, four basic premises are important:

●● All behavior of a person is communication.
●● Involuntary nonverbal communication more accurately reflects a person’s feelings.

●● The meaning of a communication is the response a
message evokes, rather than what was intended to be
communicated.
●● All behavior is adaptive.
Safety is a basic human need. Clients need to feel safe
with the VHCT, so they can share their real concerns and
fears, and safe enough to be vulnerable. Much of what
veterinarians ask clients to do involves changing something, to seemingly take a risk. Clients need to feel safe
in order to make these changes and take these risks for
their animal companions. Otherwise, they will respond
with fight or flight behaviors. Both fight and flight have
distinct nonverbal elements of kinesics, proxemics, paralanguage, and autonomic changes (Table 1.1).
It is important to look at the overall pattern of nonverbal behaviors and not just any one sign. Some body
postures can have more than one meaning. For instance,
folded arms could simply mean that the client is chilly.
The rest of the cues should also be assessed to find the
meaning of the behavior. If the arms are crossed, but
everything else fits into the ‘safe’ category, the chances
are that this is a reaction to the cold temperature in the

25/04/16 9:40 am

6

General approach

Table 1.1 Fight or flight nonverbal behaviors.
Safety

Fight

Flight

Body engaged,
leaning forward

Body engaged at
a distance

Body disengaged/
pushing back

Arms and legs
uncrossed

Fist/jaw clenched

Arms and legs
crossed

Decreased body
tension

Increased body
tension

Head turned
away, eyes
widened

Variety to
­gestures and
voice

Voice volume
increased,
staccato

Voice strained,
hesitant, volume
low

Normal skin
color and even
breathing

Face flushed,
breathing deeper

Skin blanched,
breath shallow or
held

examination room. Additionally, fight and flight are often
seen together; the client may be upset with the VHCT but
afraid to compromise the relationship and so prefers to
stay silent.
Nonverbal behaviors do not all have the same meaning
in various cultures. The main intercultural differences
often revolve around eye gaze, interpersonal distance,
and touch. However, issues of safety are cross-cultural as
expressed through body tension, autonomic responses,
and the universal facial expressions of fear, anger, grief,
surprise, disgust, and joy. While Eckman found facial
expressions to be the same throughout diverse cultures,
Darwin also found them to be similar between species.
It is important for the VHCT to recognize expressions
of confusion and helplessness, although they are not
defined as universal. Confusion is depicted in rising of
the eyebrows, furrowing of the brows, and sometimes a
cocking of the head to one side or opening of the mouth. It
is best to stop and provide clarification and answer questions when clients display this behavior. Helplessness
includes a gesture of turning the hands into a palm-up
position. When this gesture is observed, clients likely feel
at a loss regarding the current discussion. It is important
to acknowledge this feeling and provide an opportunity
for the client to express this verbally.
Helping clients move from a ‘not-safe’ to a ‘safe’ place
creates a helping relationship. In doing so, quality information can be gathered relative to their current s­ ituation,
including the animal, assessing their readiness to accept
recommendations, and gaining their collaboration in
treatment. To move the client to a ‘safe’ place it is necessary to identify and address mixed messages.

K22463_C001.indd 6

Mixed messages can be defined as a situation in which
a person is receiving verbal or nonverbal cues that
seem to contradict each other, when verbal content and
­nonverbal behaviors do not match up. This could result
from an intent to deceive, but more often mixed messages
occur when a client is not feeling safe enough to tell the
VHCT what is truly going on. Perhaps the client disagrees
or is uneasy with what the team is recommending. In
order to address these mixed messages the incongruence needs to be noticed and the disparity acknowledged
through direct reflection or through the use of the third
person. For instance, direct reflection would sound like,
“Ms. Smith, I hear you say you agree with my recommendation to begin this medication to treat the diagnosed
Cushing’s, but I sense some hesitation”. Using third person
language would sound like, “I had someone in my office
earlier with a similar situation who was concerned about
this medication”. Use of the third person might help create even more safety by saving face. Both methods are
effective; however, direct acknowledgment is best if the
situation allows.

Verbal communication
Communication skills are critical to eliciting information and understanding each other. Owners need to tell
their ‘story’ so that the veterinarian can understand the
current situation and what they need. The veterinarian
needs to obtain the client’s story in order to gather the
required information to decide what needs to be done
for the pet. In order to obtain that story it is necessary
to engage the client and empathically respond to their
needs. John C. Maxwell said, “People don’t care how much
you know, until they know how much you care”. Clients
assume their veterinarian cares for their animal almost
as much as they do; otherwise, he/she would not have
received his/her degree. How clients feel as they leave the
clinic is based on how the VHCT responded to their needs
as well as their pet’s needs.
People working in medicine, human or animal, are
comfortable with biomedical skills and good at asking
the right questions in order to ‘find it’ and ‘fix it’. Clients
expect more than this from their veterinarian; they want
the problem to be understood from their perspective. In
order to be able to do this, the VHCT must learn how to
obtain the required information. The client is going to
have an emotional reaction to each situation, and the
VHCT needs to respond to these emotions. In short, both
biomedical and the client–animal connection information are needed to provide good care to the animal. Many
times the information gleaned from the client’s ‘story’ is
just as helpful to you as the specific clinical signs when

25/04/16 9:40 am

Medical history and client communication

generating a list of differentials. There are specific skills
that can be utilized in order to engage and empathize
with a client in an effort to elicit the information the veterinarian needs.

Engagement skills
To engage is defined as: ‘to occupy the attention or efforts
of; to attract or please’. Engaging with a client requires
establishing or re-establishing a connection with them as
a partner in the care of their animal at the beginning of
and throughout a visit. Engagement works at a person to
person level and at a professional level. This allows the
person to be seen as a person and not just an owner, while
maintaining the professional partnership necessary for
the well-being of the animal.
The VHCT is the voice of expertise and experience in
veterinary medicine. The client is the voice of expertise
and experience with their animal. Both voices need to be
heard and considered for engagement to be successful.
Clients want to tell a story. They are concerned with the
meaning of their animal’s illness. They want to explain
and speak in terms of the human–animal bond with their
pet. The VHCT wants to obtain the story as quickly as
possible. The team is concerned with the facts and often
think in terms of differential diagnoses. These different
goals may be challenging. If the VHCT focuses only on the
biomedical, the story can become an inquiry and feel to
the client like continuous interruptions. If the veterinary
care provider moves too quickly, important information
may be missed. The interests of the client and the veterinarian are both equally important when gathering the
necessary information to do what is best for the animal
involved.
Engaging with a client necessitates an invitation
requesting that the client tell their story. One of the easiest ways to do this is through the use of open-ended questions. It is easy, but it is not something most veterinarians
are used to. Instead of asking closed-ended questions to
direct the fact-finding mission, open-ended questions
will garner much more information. Examples of openended questions are:

●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

“Tell me about…”
“What happened next…”
“What thoughts or feelings did you have when…”
“Tell me more about…”
“What was that like for you…”

When only closed-ended questions are asked, the veterinarian only gets answers to the questions he/she
has asked. The client will answer what was asked and

K22463_C001.indd 7

7

­possibly not elaborate further. It is quite possible that the
veterinarian did not ask the correct question in order to
get the best answers. Clients will often remark, “He/she
didn’t ask that”. Once an open-ended question is asked,
it is important to sit back and listen. Allow the client to
complete a thought without being interrupted. A recent
study published in the Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association found that veterinarians interrupt
clients within 15.3 seconds into their response to questions. Listening without interruption and with thoughtful intention demonstrates interest and gives time to
think and process the next question or steps. To listen
with thoughtful intention, it is important to pay attention and focus on the conversation at hand. As the client
responds to the open-ended questions, it may still be
necessary to ask closed-ended questions to ensure that
the required information is communicated. These closedended ­questions are helpful to clarify the details of the
investigation:

●● “Is he eating?”
●● “Is the vomiting right after he eats?”
●● “Any diarrhea?”
Another engagement skill is that of reflective listening,
also known as parallel talk, parroting, or paraphrasing.
Reflective listening presents a two-way mirror to the
client; they hear what they are saying, but also hear it
after it was processed by the veterinary care provider.
The technique can be used to check for understanding,
create empathy, and build a positive rapport. The veterinarian’s reflection comes from listening, observing, and
interpreting verbal and nonverbal cues as he/she tries to
appreciate the client’s perspective. Someone who listens
reflectively expresses their desire to understand how the
other person is thinking and feeling, and their willingness to help and not to judge the other person.
There are three kinds of reflective listening: a simple
repeat of the client’s words, a summary and interpretation, and a hypothesis test. Some examples of reflective
listening are listed below:

●●
●●
●●
●●

“I wonder if …”
“In your experience …”
“Let me see if I understand. You …”
“It sounds like …”

Note the use of ‘I’ and ‘you’. It is important to ensure
that these two words are utilized to probe for understanding and to avoid them coming across as intimating
blame.

25/04/16 9:40 am

8

General approach

Empathy skills
It is clear that an understanding of the situation the
­client is experiencing/has experienced is necessary. It is
also important to appreciate what the experience was/
is like for the client. This can be done through empathic
responses. Empathy is defined as: ‘identification with
and understanding of another’s situation, feelings, and
motives’. This understanding creates a safe environment for the client where they feel seen, heard, and
accepted. Empathic responses require empathic nonverbal responses as well. These include facial expressions,
awareness of physical space, using appropriate touch,
matching the tone of one’s voice with that of the conversation, and being comfortable with silence if that is what
the moment calls for.
In order for the client to ‘feel seen’ it is necessary to
share one’s observations. This can be done by simply
acknowledging the facial and body expressions of the
client. Two examples of acknowledgement are: “You look
very worried”; “When I said that your face changed”. It is
important to remove as many physical barriers as possible when using empathy. With barriers, the ability to read
body language is diminished, as is the connectivity with
the client. The veterinarian needs to share his/her appreciation of the situation with the client. Two examples of
empathic appreciation are: “This little guy really scared
you and your mom”; “It sounds like you were really worried that Fluffy wouldn’t make it through the night”.’
Finally, the client needs is to feel accepted by the VHCT.
Avoiding being judgmental can be difficult depending
on the circumstances. Empathic responses that help clients feel accepted by the VHCT include: “You were caught
between a rock and a hard place”; “I think anyone who
loves their animal the way you do would have reacted
that way”; “It’s never easy, even when we know it’s right”.
Some self-disclosure from the veterinarian might be
appropriate when trying to help a client feel accepted.

information. Depending on the client, it may be easiest
to allow him/her to direct the conversation and redirect
when necessary. It may also be upsetting to a ­client to
begin with generalities about their pet when they are
very concerned about the present issue.
The transition from one line of inquiry to the next is best
achieved by summarizing at the end of each line of inquiry.
This allows the client to correct and/or clarify any information and it allows the veterinarian to organize his/her
thoughts. The structure of the discussion should be logical,
and it is important to keep the ­interview on track.
Once the necessary information has been gathered, and
a thorough physical examination has been ­performed,
the next steps need to be approached. The rationale of
the diagnostic and treatment plans should be explained
to the client before obtaining their permission to proceed both verbally and in writing, including an estimate
of the projected costs. It is important to make sure that
the client is involved in the planning of the next steps. It
is also strongly recommended to check the client’s feelings by asking what they are thinking. This allows the
veterinarian to incorporate the client’s perspective and to
find out what type of client education should be offered.
Client education is very important and alleviates fear of
the unknown.
As the consultation comes to an end, the veterinarian must make sure there is nothing else the client
has concerns about. Questions such as: “Have I missed
­anything?”, “Do you have any other questions for me?”,
“Do you have any other concerns?” can be very helpful to
the client’s feelings of contentment with the consultation
(Figure 1.4).
1.4

Structure and organization
It is helpful to the veterinarian and client to provide some
structure when getting a history. The client has come to
the clinic with a concern, the presenting problem for
the pet. The opportunity for rapport building begins the
moment the client walks into the clinic with their pet.
Introductions, to the pet and the owner, and small talk are
a good way to begin. After getting the client’s answer to
“what brings you in today?”, the VHCT member can either
continue exploring the presenting complaint or tell the
client that they will first gather some general history

K22463_C001.indd 8

Figure 1.4 The closing. (Courtesy White Oak Veterinary
Hospital)

25/04/16 9:40 am

Medical history and client communication

SUMMARY
The typical veterinarian will have approximately 200,000
client consultations over a 40-year career. These consultations can be a source of both fulfillment and stress.
The measures of success self-reported by veterinarians
include working with animals and restoring health, and
working with clients and building relationships. Good
communication skills are necessary to build these strong
veterinarian–client relationships. These skills are indispensable to effective consultations and include ensuring increased accuracy, efficiency, and supportiveness,
enhancing client and clinician satisfaction, improving
outcomes of care, and promoting collaboration and partnership. Many in veterinary medicine fear that ‘good
communication’ takes longer; paying attention to everything mentioned above increases the consultation time.
Research in the human medical field has shown that it
does not take any more time to utilize these skills and
that good communication increases efficiency. Mastering
the art and science of communication will allow the veterinarian to provide the best possible care to animals and
their owners.

9

Hampton JR, Harrison MJG, Mitchell JR et al. (1975) Relative
contributions of history taking, physical examination and
laboratory investigation to diagnosis and management of
medical outpatients. Br Med J 2:486–489.
Keller VF, Carroll JG (1994) A new model for physician–patient
communication. Patient Educ Couns 23:131–140.
Kurtz S (2006) Teaching and learning communication in
­veterinary medicine. J Vet Med Educ 33:11–19.
Kurtz SM, Silverman J, Draper J (2005) Teaching and Learning
Communications Skills in Medicine, 2nd edn. Radcliffe Medical
Press, Abingdon.
Lagoni L, Butler C, Hetts S (1994) The Human–Animal Bond and
Grief. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 124–131.
Marvel MK, Doherty WJ, Weiner E (1998) Medical interviewing by
exemplary family physicians. J Fam Pract 47:343–348.
Maxwell JC (2004) Winning with People: Discover the People
Principles that Work for You Every Time. Thomas Nelson, Inc.,
Nashville, p. 91.
Osborne CA (2001) What are veterinarians worth? J Am Vet Med
Assoc 219:302–303.
Shaw J (2006) Four core communication skills of highly
effective practitioners. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
36:385–396.
Shaw J, Adams C, Bonnett BN et al. (2012) Veterinarian
satisfaction with companion animal visits. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 240:832–841.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Dalgleish T, Powers M (1999) (eds.) Handbook of Cognition and
Emotion. Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp. 21–45.
Dysart L, Coe J, Adams C (2011) Analysis of solicitation of client
concern in companion animal practice. J Am Vet Med Assoc
238:1609–1615.

K22463_C001.indd 9

25/04/16 9:40 am

This page intentionally left blank

11

Chapter 2

Common clinical problems

2.1 Dyspnea
Elizabeth Rozanski

INTRODUCTION
Difficulty breathing, or ‘dyspnea’, requires prompt
­attention in dogs and cats. Some authors prefer to avoid
the term dyspnea, as it defines a sensation of breathlessness in people, which dogs and cats are unable to
describe, and substitute respiratory distress or shortness
of breath. No matter the name, respiratory distress of any
­origin ­represents a true emergency, and rapid attention
is ­warranted to identify the underlying cause, to limit
the sensation of difficulty breathing, and to provide diagnostic and therapeutic information for clients of affected
animals.
Localization of the source of the distress will provide
useful clues as to the cause of the distress and may help
direct therapeutic options. Respiratory distress may be
localized to the upper airways, lung parenchyma, or pleural space. Occasionally, pain or severe acidosis may result
in tachypnea, which may look similar to respiratory distress. It is particularly important to recognize upper airway obstruction or partial obstruction and pleural space
disease (pneumothorax or pleural effusion), as these are
particularly amenable to urgent interventions, such as
intubation or thoracentesis. Success in patient management revolves around developing a solid knowledge base
of potential causes of respiratory distress and ‘pattern
recognition’ of common emergent or urgent problems
affecting dogs and cats. The goals of this chapter are to
provide guidelines for emergent management and to
highlight common emergent conditions resulting in
respiratory distress.
Any client calling to report respiratory distress or
possible respiratory distress should be advised to bring
the patient into the hospital immediately for evaluation. While an understanding of all potential causes of
respiratory distress is helpful, the first steps in the clinical evaluation of a patient presenting with respiratory
distress are to provide a supplemental source of oxygen
and to obtain a brief history from the client. Respiratory

K22463_C002.indd 11

distress is often acute, although some chronic ­medical
conditions may present with new-onset respiratory
­
distress. Common causes of new respiratory distress
­
in patients with chronic diseases include: cardiogenic
pulmonary edema associated with chronic valvular
­
disease; ­
­
pulmonary thromboembolism from a variety
of causes including g
­lomerulonephritis or hemolytic
­anemia; pulmonary metastatic disease, most commonly
from hemangiosarcoma or carcinoma; and aspiration
pneumonia associated with megaesophagus, laryngeal
paralysis or other pharyngeal dysfunction.
All hospitals should have a form of supplemental
­oxygen available. Supplemental oxygen may be p
­ rovided
via a variety of options, including flow-by, face mask,
nasal oxygen, e-collar and cellophane wrap (‘oxygen
hood’), oxygen cage, and intubation with intermittent
­positive pressure ventilation (IPPV). Flow-by oxygen is
provided by holding an oxygen source near the mouth
and ­nostrils of the affected patient. Flow-by oxygen is an
easy and rapid solution; however, the actual increase over
room air’s oxygen content may be minimal, particularly
with an anxious or uncooperative pet. Oxygen may also
be ­provided with a face mask, with the oxygen tubing
attached to a cone that is placed over the nose and mouth
of the patient. The oxygen concentration achieved with
a face mask is also variable, although with very weak
animals a high percentage (>80%) may be reached. Both
flow-by and face mask oxygen may require veterinary
personnel to hold both the pet and the oxygen supply.
Nasal oxygen involves placement of a flexible catheter
into the nasal passages and insufflation of humidified
oxygen, typically at 50–100 ml/kg/min. Nasal oxygen is
particularly useful in pets that are neither panting nor
open-mouth breathing, as high inspiratory flow rates
associated with panting will result in relative decreases
in the percentage inspired oxygen. Nasal oxygen is commonly placed after patient stabilization, rather than
urgently in the emergency setting. Nasal catheters may
also be advanced into the trachea, by-passing the upper

25/04/16 10:11 am

12

General approach

airways. A home-made oxygen hood may be created with
an Elizabethan collar and cellophane wrap, or may be
commercially purchased. An oxygen cage is also frequently used to provide supplemental oxygen. Oxygen
cages are commonly well-tolerated by both cats and dogs,
and are also capable of reaching a high concentration
of oxygen; however, if the cage door is open for patient
manipulation, the oxygen concentration will rapidly
equilibrate with the room air. Finally, heavy sedation and
intubation plus IPPV are the best options for providing
high levels of supplemental oxygen, removing respiratory fatigue, and eliminating patient fear and anxiety.
During the initial stabilization of the pet, a history
should be obtained from the owner. In some cases, the
precipitating cause of the respiratory distress is straightforward, such as with traumatic injuries, while in other
cases the onset may be subtle. Owners should be questioned as to past medical conditions, history of routine
veterinary care, including heartworm prophylaxis, and
finally, the progression of the signs of respiratory distress should be described. Peracute signs are frequently
associated with trauma, aspiration pneumonitis, major
vascular abnormalities such as emboli or thrombosis,
neurogenic pulmonary edema, and cardiogenic pulmonary edema when associated with a major cordae tendineae rupture. In less acute disease, and especially in cats,
the development of respiratory distress may be preceded
by anorexia, lethargy, or abnormal behavior (such as hiding and refusing to jump on furniture).
Ideally, following history and physical examination
(PE), the source of the respiratory distress may be localized and further diagnostics and therapeutics pursued
as indicated. Owners should be advised that the prognosis is dependent on the underlying disease, and that
it is ­difficult to predict the outcome in any individual
patient. Many animals with moderate to severe respiratory ­distress recover with supportive and specific care. It
is easy to stereotype certain breeds of dyspneic animals
to particular disorders, but it is important to avoid tunnel vision and to consider all the possibilities. However,
clinical guidelines may be useful to the clinician for
­
common causes of respiratory distress (Table 2.1.1) and
examples are discussed in the sections below. (See also
Figure 2.1.1.)

Table 2.1.1 Main causes of acute respiratory distress in the dog
and cat.
Dog

Cat

Brachycephalic syndrome
and all causes of upper
airway occlusion

Pneumonia, allergic
bronchitis

Laryngeal paralysis

Neurogenic pulmonary
edema

Collapsed trachea and main
stem bronchi

Congestive heart failure

Pneumonia

Upper airway obstruction:
tumors, foreign bodies

Acute respiratory distress
syndrome/acute lung injury

Acute respiratory distress
syndrome/acute lung injury

Congestive heart failure

Pyo-, hemo-, chylothorax;
other effusions

Neurogenic pulmonary
edema

Chest trauma

Chest trauma

Pulmonary fibrosis

Spontaneous pneumothorax
Pulmonary
thromboembolism/
thrombosis
Pulmonary metastatic
disease
Pulmonary fibrosis
Pleural effusion
(pyo-, hemo-, chylothorax)/
pleural space disease

EXAMPLES OF TYPICAL CAUSES
OF DYSPNEA IN CATS

Thoracic radiographs: Bronchial pattern on radiographic
evaluation; hyperinflation/air trapping, collapse of a
lung lobe (classically the right middle lung lobe).
Other testing: Exclude heartworm and lungworm infection; possible transtracheal aspirate for cytologic evaluation and aerobic culture; consider evaluation for
Mycoplasma spp.
Emergent therapy: Oxygen, systemic glucocorticoids,
bronchodilators (albuterol by inhalation or terbutaline
[0.01 mg/kg SC or 0.1–0.2 mg/kg PO q12h (in practice ¼ of
a 2.5 mg tablet)]).
Clinical course: Expect significant improvement within
12 hours of steroids and bronchodilators; rapid discharge.

Feline allergic bronchitis

Congestive heart failure

Signalment: Young adult to middle aged cats.
PE findings: Cough/wheeze; normal rectal temperature.

Signalment: Any age cat; hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
is more common in larger cats.

K22463_C002.indd 12

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

Cough,
expiratory
push?

Respiratory
distress?

No

Short/
shallow?
No

Yes

Any potential
for trauma?

Loud
sounds?

Yes
Exclude pulmonary
contusions,
pneumothorax,
diaphragmatic
hernia

Pleural
space

No

No

2.1.1

Yes

No

Lower
airway
disease

13

Mixed inspiratory/
expiratory effort?

Yes

Yes

Upper airways:
laryngeal,
brachycephalic
disease

Parenchymal
disease

Figure 2.1.1 Diagnostic algorithm for dyspnea.

PE findings: Murmur/gallop in many but not all; jugular
venous distension, hypothermia.
Thoracic radiographs: Cardiomegaly; patchy interstitial
to alveolar infiltrates.
Other testing: Echocardiography; NT pro-BNP snap test
may be useful.
Emergent therapy: Oxygen, furosemide (1–4 mg/kg IV or
IM q2–8h).
Clinical course: Expect improvement within 12 hours;
hospitalization course may extend for 2–4 days and excessive diuresis may result in dehydration and anorexia.

Upper airway obstruction
Signalment: Any age cat; younger cats are more commonly affected with polyps, foreign bodies, or infection; older cats more commonly affected with laryngeal
neoplasia.
PE findings: Loud respiration, prolonged inspiratory
time, anxiety, sometimes cervical extension.
Thoracic radiographs: Generally unremarkable.
Other testing: Oral examination under sedation; be
­prepared for a difficult intubation.
Emergent therapy: Tracheostomy.
Clinical course: Variable, depends on the cause.

Pleural space disease
Signalment: More common in older cats; younger cats
may have pyothorax or mediastinal lymphoma.

K22463_C002.indd 13

PE findings: Short, shallow respiration, muffled lung
sounds, increased abdominal effort.
Thoracic radiographs: Pleural space disease (fluid, air, or
mass lesions) is readily apparent.
Other testing: Screening (T-FAST) ultrasound, echocardiography, thoracentesis with cytology and bacterial
­culture; infections may be anaerobic.
Emergent therapy: Thoracentesis; thoracostomy tube
placement.
Clinical course: Variable, depends on the cause. Prognosis
tends to be guarded.

EXAMPLES OF TYPICAL CAUSES
OF DYSPNEA IN DOGS
Upper airway obstruction
Signalment: Brachycephalic or older large breed dogs are
most commonly affected. Any dog can be affected with a
foreign object (ball/rawhide).
PE findings: Loud respiration, prolonged inspiratory
time; hyperthermia.
Thoracic radiographs: Generally unremarkable; may
show concurrent disease such as megaesophagus, hiatal
hernia, or noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Other testing: Oral examination under sedation. Be
­prepared for a difficult intubation and also be prepared
to complete any surgical procedure that is warranted,

25/04/16 10:11 am

14

General approach

such as arytenoid lateralization (laryngeal paralysis) or
soft palate resection.
Emergent therapy: Tracheostomy, sedation, cooling.
Clinical course: Variable, depends on the cause and if
concurrent pneumonia or noncardiogenic edema.

Collapsed trachea
Signalment: Toy breeds.
PE findings: Typical ‘honking’-type cough, but can
­present as dyspneic without cough.
Thoracic radiographs: Narrowing involving cervical or
thoracic trachea, or main stem bronchi.
Other testing: Bronchoscopy showing intraluminal
­tracheal narrowing.
Emergent therapy: Oxygen, mild sedation with acepromazine, and cough suppressants. Bronchodilator (aminophylline, theophylline, or beta adrenergic drugs such as
albuterol or terbutaline) may be useful in dogs with concurrent chronic bronchitis. Rarely, emergent insertion of
a tracheal stent.
Clinical course: Always guarded for the first 24 hours;
recurrences common.

Pneumonia
Signalment: Young puppies with or without respiratory
disease, dogs with pharyngeal/esophageal disease, any
condition associated with altered consciousness or that
can lead to aspiration of gastric contents into the airway;
hunting breeds in areas with endemic fungal disease.
PE findings: Tachypnea, fever, cough.
Thoracic radiographs: Alveolar infiltrates, particularly
cranial ventral lung lobes. Fungal pneumonias may
appear nodular or military.
Other testing: CBC for signs of systemic inflammation,
tracheal wash for culture and cytology evaluation (while
noting the associated risks with this procedure).
Emergent therapy: Prompt institution of broad-spectrum
antibiotics, supplemental oxygen. Antifungal therapy.
Clinical course: Improvement within 2–3 days in
most cases; respiratory failure/death are possible.
Hospitalization for 3–5 days. Fungal pneumonias have
more protracted course with more guarded prognosis.

Acute lung injury/acute respiratory
distress syndrome
Signalment: Any age; always associated with another
primary insult (pulmonary or extrapulmonary).
PE findings: Tachypnea with severe distress.
Thoracic radiographs: Alveolar infiltrates; all lung lobes
affected.

K22463_C002.indd 14

Other testing: Echocardiography to exclude congestive
heart failure and pulmonary thromboembolism; airway
culture for pneumonia (may occur concurrently).
Emergent therapy: Supplemental oxygen; consider
­positive pressure ventilation.
Clinical course: Guarded prognosis; lengthy course for
resolution.

Congestive heart failure
Signalment: Older small breed dogs with long-standing
murmurs; Dobermanns and other large breed dogs.
PE findings: Tachycardia, tachypnea, murmur, gallop.
Thoracic radiographs: Alveolar infiltrates, particularly
in the perihilar region; cardiomegaly.
Other testing: Echocardiography; NT pro-BNP if echocardiography not promptly available.
Emergent therapy: Diuretics (furosemide 2–4 mg/kg
IV); consider pimobendan, nitroprusside; supplemental
oxygen.
Clinical course: Improvement within 1–2 days in most
cases; hospitalization for 2–4 days.

Thoracic trauma
Signalment: Any age; young dogs more commonly
affected.
PE findings: Tachypnea, distress, other signs of trauma.
Thoracic radiographs: Patchy interstitial to alveolar
infiltrates (contusion), pneumothorax, rib fractures, and
diaphragmatic hernia are all possible. Anticoagulant
rodenticide intoxication can cause alveolar infiltrates
and pleural effusion without evidence of trauma.
Other testing: As clinically indicated.
Emergent therapy: Thoracentesis, correction of ­hernia,
pain relief; avoid large volume fluid boluses; ­supplemental
oxygen.
Clinical course: Improvement within 2–3 days in most
cases; mortality usually due to associated injuries.

Spontaneous pneumothorax
Signalment: Large breed dogs, northern breeds (Akita,
Alaskan Malamute, American Eskimo, and others) and
Golden Retrievers appear overrepresented.
PE findings: Tachypnea, muffled lung sounds.
Thoracic radiographs: Large volume pneumothorax.
Other testing: As clinically needed; clinicians debate if CT
scanning provides useful information.
Emergent therapy: Thoracentesis.
Clinical course: Recommend prompt surgical therapy
for resection of bullae via a median sternotomy. Exclude
(rare) neoplasia or infectious cause.

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

Pulmonary thromboembolism
Signalment: Any age; older dogs more likely affected
with co-morbidities that are associated with pulmo­
nary thromboembolism, such as Cushing’s syndrome,
protein-losing nephropathy, immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
PE findings: Tachypnea, loud S2.
Thoracic radiographs: Oligemia, patchy infiltrates,
­pleural effusion may or may not be present.
Other testing: Echocardiography, CT angiogram. Lab­
oratory testing for hypercoagulability, urine ­
protein:
creatinine ratio.
Emergent therapy: Anticoagulation with heparin or
low-molecular-weight heparin, supplemental oxygen.
Clinical course: Improvement within 2–3 days in most
cases; sudden death is possible.

Pulmonary fibrosis
Signalment: Older dogs; terriers (especially West Highland
White) and Chihuahuas appear overrepresented.
PE findings: Tachypnea, exercise intolerance.
Thoracic radiographs: Diffuse interstitial infiltrates,
­possible right-sided cardiac enlargement.
Other testing: Echocardiography, CT, bronchoalveolar
lavage.
Emergent therapy: Supplemental oxygen. No specific
therapy known to be helpful.
Clinical course: Gradual progression over weeks to
months.

Pulmonary metastatic disease
Signalment: Older dogs more commonly affected; may or
may not have a known history of neoplasia.
PE findings: Tachypnea (common when bronchi are
­compromised), cough occasionally with hemoptysis.
Thoracic radiographs: Nodular, may have a miliary
­component; spontaneous pneumothorax may occur.

K22463_C002.indd 15

15

Other testing: Search for the primary may be ­undertaken,
but may also be appropriate to focus on palliative care.
Emergent therapy: Supplemental oxygen.
Clinical course: Progressive disease.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Campbell VL (2011) Respiratory complications in critical
illness of small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
41(4):709–716,
Corcoran BM, Cobb M, Martin MW et al. (1999) Chronic
­pulmonary disease in West Highland white terriers. Vet Rec
144(22):611–616.
Epstein SE, Hopper K, Mellema MS et al. (2013) Diagnostic
utility of D-dimer concentrations in dogs with pulmonary
­
embolism. J Vet Intern Med 27(6):1646–1649.
Fine DM, DeClue AE, Reinero CR (2008) Evaluation of
­circulating amino terminal-pro-B-type natriuretic peptide
­concentration in dogs with respiratory distress attributable
to congestive heart failure or primary pulmonary disease.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 232(11):1674–1679.
Goggs R, Benigni L, Fuentes VL et al. (2009) Pulmonary
­thromboembolism. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 19(1):30–52.
Goggs R, Chan DL, Benigni L et al. (2014) Comparison of
­computed tomography pulmonary angiography and
point-of-care tests for pulmonary thromboembolism
­diagnosis in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 5(4):190–197.
Powell L, Rozanski EA, Tidwell A et al. (1999) A retrospective
analysis of pulmonary contusion secondary to motor
­vehicle accidents in 143 dogs: 1994–1997. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 9:127–136.
Rozanski E, Chan DL (2005) Approach to the patient with
respiratory distress. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
35(2):307–317.
Sigrist NE, Adamik KN, Doherr MG et al. (2011) Evaluation of
respiratory parameters at presentation as clinical ­indicators
of the respiratory localization in dogs and cats with
­respiratory distress. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 21(1):13–23.
Sumner C, Rozanski E (2013) Management of respiratory
­emergencies in small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 43(4):799–815.

25/04/16 10:11 am

This page intentionally left blank

17

Chapter 2

Common clinical problems

2.2 Syncope, episodic weakness, and collapse
Boyd R. Jones

INTRODUCTION
Syncope, episodic weakness, and collapse are clinical
signs that are often easily recognized, but sometimes confirmation of their cause may be difficult. Owner descriptions of what they see may be confusing or what they
have seen may be misinterpreted. Syncope, weakness, or
collapse may occur at rest but occur more frequently with
exercise and activity.
Syncope (‘fainting’) refers to the sudden loss of consciousness resulting from paroxysmal episodes of
impaired cerebral blood flow, which deprives the brain
of energy substrates, oxygen, and glucose. True syncope
is most often related to cardiac disease but can be associated with coughing (‘cough syncope’), hypoglycemia,
severe anemia, polcythemia, acid–base imbalance, and
other causes.
Episodic weakness or exercise intolerance is weakness
that occurs with activity and exercise and improves after
rest. There is weakness and fatigue after mild exercise but
occasionally more prolonged exercise is needed to cause
clinical signs. The degree of weakness may vary from
mild hindlimb ataxia to complete collapse. Most animals
are normal in between episodes. Collapse may be acute
with seizures, narcolepsy/catalepsy, or syncope, but also
as a component of more chronic and progressive metabolic or neurologic disorders.

CLINICAL SIGNS
Syncope is characterized by a short period of flaccid
­collapse and loss of consciousness. Most dogs are motionless with relaxed skeletal muscles. Sometimes there is
involuntary urination and vocalization. Recovery is rapid
but there may be confusion for a short time afterwards.
Signs of episodic weakness are often intermittent and
include a degree of weakness, stiff stilted walk, ventro-­
flexion of the neck and head, and reluctance to continue
walking or exercising. Animals may lie down and refuse
to move or collapse when they attempt to get up and walk.

K22463_C002.indd 17

They may be alert or obtunded and sometimes pant as
they appear to be, and are, apprehensive. Muscle strength
improves after rest, and between episodes the animal
may appear normal. There may be key events that precipitate the clinical signs, such as exercise, feeding, or
excitement; these ‘triggers’ must be identified by careful
and complete questioning of the owner.
Relying on the owner’s description of clinical signs can
be misleading. Their description of what they see may not
give a true indication of the clinical signs. Most digital
cameras and smart phones have movie capacity so that
owners can be asked to record the event to confirm what
they see. The clinician can then view the event to determine its true nature and have an accurate record of the
clinical signs, which is essential to aid differential diagnosis and direct the next investigations. Furthermore, the
video can be sent to a specialist clinician for interpretation and specialist advice if that is required.
A complete history and clinical examination are also
essential to help localize the cause to a body system and,
in the case of a neurologic disease, to localize the lesion(s).
Some of the important questions to ask the owner of an
animal with syncope, collapse, or weakness are included
in Table 2.2.1, along with the object of the questioning.
Clinical experience, the history, and findings from a physical examination may enable the clinician to characterize the condition so that the diagnosis only needs to be
confirmed. However, especially with episodic weakness,
the animal may be examined when it is, or appears to be,
normal, making further investigation essential. A plethora of diagnostic tests and procedures may be considered, therefore it is best to delay full investigation until
an episode is viewed. For additional investigation there
needs to be a high index of suspicion as to whether the
condition is neuromuscular, metabolic, or cardiovascular
in origin. The investigation required for each is different. An approach to working up a case with syncope or
episodic weakness is shown in Figures 2.2.1, 2.2.2 and in
Table 2.2.2. More information about each condition can
be sought from other chapters in this book.

25/04/16 10:11 am

18

General approach

Table 2.2.1 Questions for clients and their object, with specific outcomes related to syncope, episodic weakness, and collapse.
History

Object and outcome

What did you see?

Try to determine from the description of the clinical signs if they are
cardiac or neurologic in origin.

How often have the signs occurred?

Increased frequency may suggest a progressive disease.

Are the clinical signs always the same?

Episodic conditions usually show repeatable clinical signs.

Is the animal normal immediately after an
episode?

With syncopal causes and neuromuscular diseases there are often no
significant signs, in contrast to seizures.

Is the animal normal in between episodes?

There may be no signs, but with some neuromuscular diseases clinical
signs can be detected.

Is there anything that initiates an episode?

Exercise/coughing may induce syncope. Feeding may induce narcolepsy;
exercise is a trigger for weakness and collapse with neuromuscular diseases
(e.g. myasthenia gravis).

Is there vomiting/regurgitation?

Regurgitation frequently occurs with metabolic and neuromuscular disease
(e.g. myasthenia gravis, Addison’s disease).

Have you seen the dog vomit or regurgitate?

Try to establish if esophageal signs are present suggesting muscle disease.

Are litter mates affected?

Breed related conditions that result in weakness and syncope are well
known.

Is the animal stiff or floppy during an episode

Stiffness may be present with seizures or some myopathies but often not
with cardiac and metabolic causes.

What color are the tongue/gums?

Pale or cyanotic mucous membranes may indicate cardiovascular disease.

What are the heart/pulse rates?

Detection of arrhythmias indicates cardiac disease.

DIAGNOSTIC INVESTIGATION
Minimum database
Hematology, biochemistry including values for all
­electrolytes (sodium, potassium, calcium, phosphate, creatine kinase), and urinalysis are the minimum required
for most cases and the results may provide a diagnosis or give an indication for further diagnostic tests
(e.g. ­
adrenocortical function, thyroid function, fasting
blood glucose/insulin).
An electrocardiogram (ECG) should be performed if
cardiac disease (especially an arrhythmia) is suspected.
Owners can be taught how to check and determine the
heart rate and rhythm during an attack if the animal is
normal at the time of examination. An ECG is often normal and therefore ambulatory ECG (Holter) monitoring
may be required. Blood pressure should be determined if
cardiac disease and/or hypertension is suspected.
Lactate and pyruvate analysis can assist with some
rare metabolic muscle diseases that are classified as

K22463_C002.indd 18

mitochondrial myopathies. These disorders are genetic
in nature and are characterized by accumulation of vacuoles of lipid, glycogen, and other metabolites within certain muscle fibers, abnormal urine organic acid and blood
amino acid profiles, lactate and pyruvate elevations, and
abnormal lactate and pyruvate ratios.

Endocrine
Adrenal and thyroid function tests may be indicated in
some cases; measurement of insulin (with glucose) after
fasting or at the time of an event is required if insulinoma
or another hypoglycemia causing tumor (e.g. gastric leiomyoma) is suspected.

Serology
Measurement of acetylcholine receptor antibodies is
essential in dogs with suspected myasthenia gravis
(MG) or in those with acquired megaesophagus. Serology
may also be of value if specific infectious diseases are
suspected.

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

Syncope
Episodic weakness
Collapse

History;
clinical
examination;
neurologic
examination;
video
evidence

Vomiting/diarrhea
Icterus
Ascites
Polydipsia/uria
Weakness only

Metabolic
disease

Pale or cyanotic
mucous membranes
History of syncope
Arrhythmia
Abnormal auscultation

Cardiorespiratory
disease

Stiffness
Joint pain

Orthopedic
disease

19

2.2.1

Normal examination
Regurgitation
Muscle wasting or
stiffness
Muscle pain

Neuromuscular
disease

Loss of consciousness
Neurologic signs

Central nervous
system disease

Food/exertion
stimulated

Narcolepsy
Catalepsy

Figure 2.2.1 Algorithm for the general approach to the differential diagnosis of syncope, episodic weakness, and collapse.

Syncope

Cardiac disease

Congenital diseases
Vasovagal syncope
Acquired cardiac disease
Arrhythmias:
- bradycardia
- tachycardia
- heart block

Upper respiratory

Cough syncope
Soft palate paresis
Brachycephalic syndrome
Laryngeal paralysis
Foreign body

Lower respiratory

Diffuse disease
Pulmonary and pleural
diseases
Intrathoracic masses

2.2.2

Figure 2.2.2 Algorithm for syncope.

K22463_C002.indd 19

25/04/16 10:11 am

20

General approach

Table 2.2.2 Differential diagnosis of weakness.
Endocrine diseases

Insulinoma
Hypoadrenocorticism
Hyperadrenoocorticism (Cushing’s myopathy)
Hypothyroidism (myopathy)
Hypoparathyroidism
Pheochromocytoma
Diabetes mellitus/ketoacidosis

Orthopedic diseases

Degenerative joint disease (hips, stifles, spondylosis)
Polyarthritis – various types

Hematologic diseases

Anemia – all causes
Myeloproliferative disease
Polycythemia
Hemoglobinopathies

Metabolic diseases

Uremia (encephalopathy and hypokalemia)
Hyperglycemia/hypoglycemia
Hypernatremia/hyponatremia
Hypokalemia/hyperkalemia
Hypercalcemia/hypocalcemia
Acidosis
Hyperthermia
Hypoxia

Myopathies

Inherited:
•• Labrador Retriever mypopathy
•• Sex-linked muscular dystrophies (dystrophin defects): Golden Retriever, Japanese Spitz
•• Devon Rex cat myopathy
•• Burmese cat hypokalemic myopathy
•• Metabolic myopathies (e.g. pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency)
•• Myotonia
•• Muscular dystrophies
Polymyositis:
•• Infection: protozoal, viral, etc.
•• Immune-mediated
Exertional myopathy
Malignant hyperthermia
Paraneoplastic (Lambert–Eaton syndrome associated with myasthenia gravis)
Nutritional
Endocrine: steroid, hypothyroid, hyperthyroid (cats)
Lipid storage myopathy
Miscellaneous:
•• Exercise-induced collapse (Labrador Retrievers)
•• Ischemic myopathy (cat thromboembolism)

Neuromuscular junction

Myasthenia gravis: acquired, congenital
Organophosphate toxicity
Tick paralysis
Snake bite (Elapidae and pit viper)
Botulism

K22463_C002.indd 20

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

Neurologic

21

Episodic falling (Cavalier King Charles Spaniel)
Scottie cramp (also other breeds: Jack Russell, Norwich Terrier)
Narcolepsy/catalepsy (breed association)
Polyradicular neuritis (Coonhound paralysis)
Inherited breed specific neuropathies
Motor neuron diseases
Endocrine (hypothyroid, insulinoma/hypoglycemia, hyperlipidemia)
Neoplastic/paraneoplastic diseases
Distal denervating diseases
Lysosomal storage diseases
Axonopathies (e.g. Boxer)

Cerebrospinal fluid analysis

Edrophonium response

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis is of limited value
unless there is a high index of suspicion of a neurologic
disease. CSF analysis rarely contributes unless there is a
diffuse infectious or inflammatory disease of the central
nervous system.

Slow intravenous administration of an ultrashort-acting
anticholinesterase (0.1–1.0 mg edrophonium hydrochloride [Tensilon®]) is used for the diagnosis of MG. In dogs
and cats with MG there is a rapid improvement in the
ability to exercise for several minutes.

Electrophysiology

Blood gas analysis

If neuromuscular disease is suspected, electrophysiologic investigation may help confirm the suspicion.
Electromyogram (EMG) insertion activity can help confirm muscle or nerve disease and help differentiate
muscular from axonal disease. Nerve conduction velocity might provide more definitive information with
neuropathies.

Imaging
Dogs with suspected cardiac disease require echocardiography; plain radiographs of the thorax can help if cardiorespiratory disease or megaesophagus is suspected.
Contrast radiography or fluoroscopy can determine
esophageal dilatation/function. Individual cases may
have indication for CT/MRI investigation.

Muscle/nerve biopsy
Muscle biopsy is of particular value for the diagnosis
of the inherited myopathies. Nerve biopsy can confirm
axonal degeneration/regeneration, demyelination, and
fibrosis, findings that have diagnostic and/or prognostic
significance.

K22463_C002.indd 21

Blood gas analysis can assist with some cardiorespiratory diseases (hypoxemia) and some metabolic myopathies (metabolic acidosis with exercise).

Genetic tests
Molecular (DNA) diagnostic testing is available for some
inherited diseases (e.g. Burmese cat hypokalemic polymyopathy, Labrador Retriever myopathy, Japanese Spitz
myopathy, narcolepsy). Your diagnostic laboratory should
be consulted or an internet search made for information
on what diagnostic tests are available for that breed if
you suspect a familial link.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Platt SR, Olby N (2011) (eds.) BSAVA Manual of Canine and
Feline Neurology, 3rd edn. British Small Animal Veterinary
Association, Gloucester.
Vite CH, Braund KG (2003) (eds.) Braund’s Clinical Neurology in
Small Animals: Localization, Diagnosis and Treatment. Ithaca,
New York. www.ivis.org/advances/vite/toc.asp

25/04/16 10:11 am

This page intentionally left blank

23

Chapter 2

Common clinical problems

2.3 Pigmenturia
Michael Schaer

INTRODUCTION
Under normal circumstances, the color of urine ranges
from clear pale yellow to dark yellow or amber depending on the concentration of the urochrome (a product of
bilirubin metabolism). Dilute urine is clear and light yellow while concentrated urine is dark yellow. Pigmenturia
relates to urine that is discolored because of a pathologic
process or as a result of some ingested chemical found in
food or drugs. Certain foods are known to cause discolored urine and these include beetroot (red), senna and
rhubarb (yellow to brown or red), and carotene (brown).
Various drugs that can cause pigmenturia in humans
are listed in Table 2.3.1. An example of drug-associated
pigmenturia is shown in Figures 2.3.1a, b, which depicts
methylene blue-induced blue pigment change involving
oral mucosa and blue–green pigmenturia in a cat.
The main endogenous causes of pigmenturia include
red blood cells (Figure 2.3.2), hemoglobin (Figure 2.3.3),
bilirubin (Figure 2.3.4), myoglobin (Figure 2.3.5), and
chyle. Sometimes, crystalluria can cause a color change
that is dependent on the specific type of crystal, which
can be formed from errors in metabolism (alkaptonuria in
humans) or from the ingestion of certain drugs (e.g. sulfa
drugs and others). The main pathologic concerns in dogs
and cats involve hemoglobin and myoglobin because they
can cause acute kidney injury (AKI). Crystalluria derived

from the metabolism of certain drugs can also cause
injury to renal tubules. Although bilirubinuria and chyluria represent potentially serious underlying disorders
in the body, most clinicians focus their main concerns
toward the tubulotoxicity associated with hemoglobinuria and myoglobinuria. The algorithm (Figure 2.3.6)
shows the differential features of pigmenturia.
2.3.1

a

Table 2.3.1 Some drugs that can cause pigmenturia in humans,
dogs, and cats.
Drug

Urine color

Deferoxamine

Red

Rifampin

Red

Hydroxycobalamine

Red

Methylene blue

Blue, green

Adapted from: Aycock RD, Kass DA (2012) Abnormal urine
color. South Med J 105(1):43–47 and Plum DC (2011) Plumb’s
Veterinary Drug Handbook, 7th edn. PharmaVet Inc, Wisconsin.

K22463_C002.indd 23

b
Figures 2.3.1a, b This cat’s oral mucous membranes
were discolored from the methylene blue contained in its
medication for urinary tract disease (a). The cat’s urine sample
was a blue–green color (b). This product is no longer used in
cats because of the associated Heinz body hemolytic anemia
that it can cause.

25/04/16 10:11 am

24

General approach

2.3.2

Figure 2.3.2 This urine sample shows hematuria. The bright red
color is characteristic. Centrifugation of this sample would yield
a clear amber supernate and a red button on the bottom of the
tube representing the spun red blood cells.

2.3.3

Figure 2.3.3 This sample shows hemoglobinuria and its
characteristic dark red color. Centrifugation will not produce a
red button representing precipitated red blood cells. The color
of the supernate will remain the same dark red.

HEMOGLOBINURIA AND MYOGLOBINURIA
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Hemoglobin
Heme protein can cause oxidative stress, leading to systemic toxicity. The red blood cell membrane acts as a
protective barrier against the proinflammatory effects
of heme protein. The body offsets the toxic effects of
any heme that is normally released into the circulation
through mechanisms involving haptoglobin, the oxidation of ferrous heme to ferric heme, and the ability

K22463_C002.indd 24

2.3.4

Figure 2.3.4 This sample depicts bilirubinuria from an icteric
dog with severe cholangiostatic liver disease.

2.3.5

Figure 2.3.5 Myoglobinuria represents rhabdomyolysis. It is
typically acellular and tea colored.

of nitrous oxide to oxidize hemoglobin to more soluble
methemoglobin. These protective mechanisms are overwhelmed with massive hemolysis and the subsequent
increase of hemoglobinuria.
The exact mechanism for the tubulotoxicity
caused by hemoglobin is unclear. The heme proteins
are thought to precipitate cast formation and cause
obstruction of the kidney tubule, resulting in acute
tubular ­necrosis of the proximal renal epithelial cells.
Hemoglobinuria imparts a dark red color to the urine,
which is not due to red blood cells, as confirmed after
urine centrifugation.

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

25

2.3.6

Discolored urine

Red

Orange

Brown/tea color

Heme protein test
positive

Positive bilirubin test

Heme protein test
positive

Bilirubin

Myoglobin, hematuria,
Hb‐uria

Hematuria

RBCs in urine
sediment;
clear spun urine
supernate

Hb‐uria

No RBCs In sediment;
supernate red

RBCs present

Blood
(hematuria)

RBCs – red blood cells
Hb‐uria – hemoglobinuria
Hb‐emia – hemoglobinemia
CK – creatine kinase
AST – alanine aspartate transferase

No RBCs

Myoglobin

Hemoglobin

Predisposing cause of
rhabdomyolysis

Signs of hemolysis,
Hb‐emia, RBC
morphologic
changes

Elevated CK
Elevated AST

Figure 2.3.6 Algorithm showing the differential features of endogenous pigmenturia.

Myoglobin

CLINICAL FEATURES AND MANAGEMENT

This muscle protein accumulates in the circulation as
a result of rhabdomyolysis. It appears in the urine as
reddish-brown (‘tea-colored’) urine. Kidney injury is
thought to result from intrarenal vasoconstriction, direct
and ischemic tubule injury, and tubular obstruction.
Myoglobin becomes concentrated along the renal tubules
and precipitates when it interacts with Tam–Horsfall protein, a process that is favored by acidic urine. Distal renal
tubular obstruction and proximal tubule toxicity are the
main consequences. Myoglobin tubular toxicity does not
occur unless the urine is acidic, and this requirement has
therapeutic implications.

The main clinical features and general treatment recommendations are outlined in Table 2.3.2. Although
AKI in the dog and cat is a rare complication associated with hemolysis and rhabdomyolysis, the clinician should be diligent in assessing their patients with
these disorders for early signs of AKI. Damage will be
indicated with elevations in blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
and serum creatinine and the presence of tubular casts
in the urine sediment. The damage is maximized by
co-existing metabolic acidosis, dehydration, and other
causes of decreased renal perfusion. The most important

K22463_C002.indd 25

25/04/16 10:11 am

26

General approach

Table 2.3.2 Endogenous pathologic causes of pigmenturia.
Pigment name

Physical
features

Associated
disorder

Pathophysiology

Diagnostic features

Treatment

Hemoglobinuria

Dark red

Massive
intravascular
hemolysis; acute
blood transfusion
reaction

Red blood cell
destruction resulting
from immune,
chemical or drug
damage to the RBC
membrane allowing
for the release of
heme protein into
the circulation
and its eventual
accumulation in the
renal tubule

Grossly red color;
positive heme protein
test with urine
dipstick; no RBCs in
the urine sediment.
Gross evidence
of hemolysis.
Macroagglutination
of RBCs if associated
with immune
hemolytic disease

Hydration with
intravenous isotonic
crystalloid solution;
intravenous sodium
bicarbonate; hemodialysis

Myoglobin

Reddishbrown; tea
colored

Rhabdomyolysis

Kidney injury is
thought to result
from intrarenal
vasoconstriction,
direct and ischemic
tubule injury, and
tubular obstruction

Markedly elevated
serum enzyme tests
(CK, AST). Urine
dark brown with no
RBCs in sediment.
Clinical signs of
disease causing the
rhabdomyolysis

Hydrate with intravenous
isotonic crystalloid
solution; alkalinization
with intravenous
sodium bicarbonate,
sometimes with added
mannitol. Hemodialysis
has been shown to help.
Antioxidants such as
vitamins E and C and
pentoxiphylline might
help

Hematuria

Red

Systemic bleeding
disorder from
drugs or disease;
urinary calculi;
renal and urinary
bladder neoplasia;
urinary tract
trauma/infection

Specific to the
particular cause

History and physical
examination;
coagulogram;
diagnostic imaging
when indicated; urine
culture

Depending on cause:
•• Stop all drugs that
promote bleeding.
•• Antidotes when
indicated;
•• Surgery where
indicated.
Not renal tubulotoxic

Bilirubinuria

Orange

Hemolysis and liver
disease

Prehepatic, hepatic,
and posthepatic
disorders

Elevated liver
enzyme tests;
diagnostic imaging
abnormalities;
hemolysis and
associated features

Treat primary disorder.
Not renal tubulotoxic.

therapeutic objectives entail replacing dehydration
deficits and providing for increased maintenance doses
of isotonic intravenous fluids. Once rehydration and
improved urine output are established, diuresis can be
provided.
Although parenteral fluid administration will not prevent AKI, it decreases its severity. Patients who do not
respond to treatment and those who become oliguric
will often require hemodialysis while still facing a very
guarded prognosis until the patient shows a decrease

K22463_C002.indd 26

in the serum BUN and creatinine that can be sustained
without dialysis.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Bosch X, Poch E, Grau JM (2009) Rhabdomyolysis and acute
kidney injury. N Engl J Med 361:62–72.
Wolfson AB (2010) Renal failure. In: Rosen’s Emergency Medicine,
7th edn. (eds. JA Marx, RS Hockberger, RM Walls et al.) Mosby
Elsevier, Philadelphia, pp. 1257–1281.

25/04/16 10:11 am

27

Chapter 2

Common clinical problems

2.4 Vomiting
Frédéric Gaschen

INTRODUCTION
Vomiting is characterized by the forceful oral ejection of
gastric content with or without addition of small intestinal content.
The vomiting response can be divided into three
sequential phases. The prodromal phase is characterized
by nausea with licking of the lips, yawning, hiding, and
depression, and occurs with hypersalivation and excessive swallowing. This is associated with relaxation of
the lower esophageal sphincter and proximal part of the
stomach. The second phase is retching, with retrograde
giant small intestinal contractions that bring jejunal and
duodenal chyme (and bile) back into the gastric lumen
if the pylorus is patent, followed by rhythmic retching,
inhibition of salivation, activation of the intercostal muscles, protection of the airways by laryngeal elevation,
and increased upper esophageal sphincter tone. Finally,
during the final expulsion phase, the cervical esophageal
and pharyngeal tones decrease, the lower esophageal
sphincter relaxes, the rectus abdominis muscle contracts,
and the diaphragm squeezes the stomach. Breathing
is momentarily inhibited and the glottis closed while
the gastric content is propelled into the esophagus and
­ultimately out of the mouth.
Regurgitation, dysphagia (associated with oral and
pharyngeal diseases), and coughing/gagging may be misinterpreted as vomiting by pet owners. Regurgitation is
the passive oral evacuation of esophageal content associated with esophageal dysmotility, obstruction, and/or
dilation. Typically, retching does not occur with regurgitation. Moreover, esophageal diseases are less prevalent
than disorders causing vomiting. Regurgitation is therefore less commonly observed overall than vomiting.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The vomiting or emetic center is a conglomerate of nuclei
located in the medulla oblongata. Vomiting can be elicited
by activation of neural or humoral pathways. The emetic
center is closely associated with the chemoreceptor trigger

K22463_C002.indd 27

zone (CRTZ), an area lacking a blood–brain barrier where
receptors are in direct contact with circulating blood.
Stimulation of the CRTZ by blood-borne emetogenic substances (e.g. uremic toxins, endotoxins, drugs) is the basis
of the humoral pathway of emesis. The emetic center may
also be stimulated by the vestibulocochlear nucleus (e.g.
motion sickness) and cortical centers. Additionally, it
receives direct input from the peritoneum and abdominal
organs via nerve fibers traveling with the vagus nerve,
the neural pathway of vomiting (Figure 2.4.1). The emetic
center is responsible for the coordination of the vomiting
effort through efferent pathways. Numerous receptors
are involved in the stimulation of vomiting and are the
targets of antiemetic drugs (Table 2.4.1).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
A wide range of diseases may cause vomiting in dogs and
cats through direct stimulation of the emetic center via
afferent vagal branches or indirectly via stimulation of
the CRTZ (Table 2.4.2). Diseases of the gastrointestinal
(GI) tract generally act directly on the vomiting center
through the neural pathway, while systemic disorders
such as kidney diseases often stimulate the CRTZ via the
humoral pathway.
2.4.1
4
3

Emetic center
Afferent:
1. CRTZ
2. Vagus n. (peritoneum,
abdominal organs)
3. Vestibular nuclei
4. Cerebral cortex
Efferent:
• Coordination of emetic response

1

Chemoreceptor
trigger zone
Afferent:
• Peripheral blood
Efferent:
• Emetic center

2

Figure 2.4.1 Afferent and efferent pathways to and from the
emetic center and chemoreceptor trigger zone.

25/04/16 10:11 am

28

General approach

Table 2.4.1 Antiemetic drugs used in dogs and cats and their target receptors.
Antiemetic drug

Target/antagonism

Dose and route

Maropitant

NK1-receptors: substance
P antagonist

1 mg/kg/day SC or IV in dogs
and cats. IV use is off-label:
dilute the drug 1:5 with saline
and administer slowly

Metoclopramide

Dopamine-2 receptor (D)

0.3–0.5 mg/kg SC q8h or 1–2
mg/kg CRI q24h

Odansetron

5-HT3 receptors in the CRTZ
(D, C) and afferent nerves (D)

0.5–1 mg/kg IV, PO q12h

0.2–0.4 mg/kg SC, IV q8h

Hypotensive, sedative

Prochlorperazine

α2 receptors, dopamine-2
receptors, histamine-1
receptors, muscarinic-1
receptors

0.1–0.5 mg/kg SC, IM q6–8h

Hypotensive, sedative

Yohimbine

α2 receptors

Dolasetron
Chlorpromazine

Other effects

Prokinetic effects on gastric
antrum

0.6–1 mg/kg IV, PO q12h

Hypotensive, sedative

D, dog; C, cat. If not specified, applies to both dogs and cats.

Table 2.4.2 Common causes of vomiting in dogs and cats.
Gastrointestinal

Outside gastrointestinal tract

Stomach
Obstructive: gastric foreign body, space-occupying lesion in pylorus
Adverse reaction to food including dietary indiscretion
Infectious: viral, bacterial, parasitic
Toxic: drugs, plants, chemicals
Chronic gastritis
Gastric neoplasia
Gastric ulcer
Gastric motility disorder

Abdominal
Acute and chronic recurring pancreatitis
Diseases of liver and biliary tree
Peritonitis
Diaphragmatic hernia
Neoplasia
Pyometra

Small bowel
Infectious: viral, bacterial, parasitic
Obstructive: foreign body, intussusception, space-occupying lesion
Adverse reaction to food including dietary indiscretion
Toxic: drugs, plants, chemicals
Inflammatory disease
Intestinal neoplasia
Paralytic ileus

Metabolic
Uremic syndrome
Electrolyte disorders
Acid–base disorders
Endocrine diseases: hyperthyroidism,
diabetic ketoacidosis, hypoadrenocorticism
Toxins: drugs, plants, chemicals
Sepsis, endotoxemia

Colon
Colitis
Severe constipation

Neurologic
Motion sickness
Vestibular disorders
Encephalitis/meningitis
Increased intracranial pressure
Psychogenic (excitation, fear, pain)
Dysautonomia

D, dog; C, cat. If not specified, applies to both dogs and cats.

K22463_C002.indd 28

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

CLINICAL APPROACH
It is likely that many dogs and cats that experience a few
episodes of acute vomiting are not presented for veterinary examination because the problem is self-limiting.
If presented to a veterinarian, acutely vomiting animals
should be assessed for the severity of disease. A few episodes of vomiting in the absence of complications such
as dehydration in an otherwise healthy animal may not
require any further investigations or treatment, even
though a bland diet and possible empirical prescription
of antiemetics may be of benefit. However, dogs and cats
that are ill need to undergo more detailed examination
and investigations
The most relevant differential diagnoses may differ
on the basis of the animal’s signalment. Younger animals
are more prone to infectious diseases, such as parvovirus infection in dogs, and to ingestion of foreign objects
(Figures 2.4.2, 2.4.3).
A detailed history should be obtained. Important questions include: diet, environment, duration and frequency
of vomiting, relationship to eating, description of the
vomiting process, appearance of the vomitus (e.g. presence of bile [Figure 2.4.4], hairballs [Figure 2.4.5], hematemesis [see Chapter 8, Digestive diseases, Figure 8.33],
frank blood [Figure 2.4.6]), behavioral changes, and
­co-existing clinical signs, as well as previous illnesses,
deworming history, and current medications. This information helps confirm the existence of vomiting, assess

2.4.2

29

the disease severity, and may yield valuable data about
any ­underlying disease(s).
A thorough physical examination should be performed.
In cats particularly, it is important to visualize the lingual frenulum by applying gentle pressure in the intermandibular space with the thumb, searching for a piece
of string looping around the base of the tongue at the

2.4.3

Figure 2.4.3 Same cat as in Figure 2.4.2. Hair bands extracted
endoscopically from the stomach. It is likely that they were
ingested over a prolonged period of time, even though the
history indicated a recent problem.
2.4.4

Figure 2.4.2 Right lateral abdominal radiograph from a
4-year-old male neutered cat with vomiting of 1-week duration.
The stomach is moderately distended with mixed gas and
soft tissue opacities that are clumped together and linear in
shape. The pyloric antrum contains gas and the duodenum and
remainder of the small intestine are fluid/gas filled.

K22463_C002.indd 29

Figure 2.4.4 Canine vomit admixed with bile.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 10:11 am

30

General approach

2.4.5

Figure 2.4.5 Hairball vomited by a cat. (Courtesy M. Schaer)
2.4.6

Figure 2.4.6 Hematemesis with frank blood in a young
Labrador Retriever. (Courtesy M. Schaer)
2.4.7

Figure 2.4.7 A piece of thread (arrow) looped around the base
of the tongue in a vomiting cat with a radiographic diagnosis of
a linear foreign body. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C002.indd 30

origin of a linear foreign body (Figure 2.4.7). Abdominal
palpation may reveal discomfort or pain (gastroenteritis,
pancreatitis), or abdominal masses (foreign body, intussusception, granuloma, neoplasia). Hydration and cardiovascular status are important to guide the planning of
fluid therapy.
In dogs presented with acute vomiting, dietary indiscretion, GI foreign body, ingestion of toxic substances, and
acute pancreatitis are the top four differential diagnoses
and should be the focus of the initial diagnostic investigations (Figure 2.4.8). Gastric dilatation volvulus (GDV)
may be associated with vomiting, although the efforts
are often unproductive. Moreover, abdominal distension
with gastric tympany is often present and easily noticed.
Abdominal radiographs are useful to evaluate gastric
position and confirm the diagnosis of GDV. They are also
necessary to rule out GI obstruction (one or two lateral
views and a ventrodorsal view). Cats may ingest foreign
bodies or chew on toxic plants; however, dietary indiscretion is less prevalent in this species, and pancreatitis is
less commonly associated with significant vomiting.
Animals with chronic or chronic intermittent vomiting commonly have diseases affecting the digestive tract
(including stomach and intestine, liver, and pancreas) or
other organ systems such as the kidneys or the endocrine
system. Therefore, the search for an underlying cause is
best started with a minimal database consisting of bloodwork (CBC, chemistry panel) and urinalysis to assess the
function of various organ systems. Abdominal imaging
(radiographs, ultrasound) can be carried out to assess
the appearance of abdominal organs. Then, based on the
information obtained from the initial database, additional more specific tests can be performed in order to
identify the primary problem. Cats may vomit chronically
in the absence of any other problems (‘healthy’ chronic
vomiters); this is sometimes associated with hairballs
(Figure 2.4.5), but the cause often remains unknown. In
these cats, increases in the vomiting frequency and onset
of additional clinical signs such as hyporexia justify further investigations.
Treatment of vomiting dogs and cats needs to focus
on three points: (1) stopping the vomiting process with
judicious use of antiemetics (Table 2.4.1), (2) correcting
the fluid and electrolyte deficits resulting from vomiting,
and (3) addressing the underlying disease at the origin of
vomiting.

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

31

2.4.8

Acute vomiting

History, physical examination,
no further localizing signs

GI foreign body
cannot
be ruled out

GI foreign body
extremely
unlikely

Abdominal
radiographs
and/or ultrasound

Obstruction

No obstruction

Laparotomy

Mild
clinical signs

Moderate/severe
clinical signs

12–24‐hour
fasting, bland diet,
possibly antiemetic

Minimal database
(CBC, chemistry
panel, abdominal
radiographs and/or
ultrasound).
Parvovirus ELISA in
young dogs

Symptomatic
and supportive
treatment
Primary disease
identified
Acute kidney injury,
acute pancreatitis,
acute hepatic/biliary
disease, parvovirus
infection,
addisonian crisis

No primary disease
identified

Gastritis,
gastroenteritis,
toxicosis

Figure 2.4.8 Algorithm for the clinical approach to acute vomiting in a dog after gastric dilatation volvulus has been
initially ruled out.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Baral RM (2012) Approach to the vomiting cat. In: The Cat:
Clinical Medicine and Management. (ed. SE Little) Elsevier
Saunders, St. Louis, pp. 426–431.

K22463_C002.indd 31

Elwood C, Devauchelle P, Elliott J et al. (2010) Emesis in dogs: a
review. J Small Anim Pract 51(1):4–22.
Twedt DC (2010) Vomiting. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 7th edn. (eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman) Saunders
Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 195–200.

25/04/16 10:11 am

This page intentionally left blank

33

Chapter 2

Common clinical problems

2.5 Polydipsia and polyuria
Michael Schaer

INTRODUCTION
Polydipsia is defined as increased thirst. Normal water
consumption in dogs should not exceed 90 ml/kg per day
(Figure 2.5.1) while normal water intake in a cat should
not exceed 45 ml/kg per day (Figure 2.5.2). Any water
2.5.1

intake that exceeds these amounts is described as
­polydipsia. Normal urine production in the dog and cat
ranges from 20 to 45 ml/kg per day, and an amount that
exceeds this range is described as polyuria.

ETIOLOGY
The two main causes of polydipsia and polyuria (PD/
PU) syndromes include primary disorders of excessive
water intake and those that involve excessive urine production. There are approximately 14 endogenous causes
of PD/PU and three exogenous causes. These and their
main mechanisms are shown in Table 2.5.1. Many of the
endogenous causes of PD/PU are accompanied by several
other clinical features that characterize the specific disorder (Table 2.5.2). Also, there are certain conditions that
can characteristically progress to eventually make the
patient overtly ill when dehydration and any associated
toxin accumulation occurs (Table 2.5.3).

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Figure 2.5.1 This polydipsic dog was diagnosed with
psychogenic polydipsia. He was able to concentrate his urine to
1.025 with the water deprivation test.
2.5.2

The pathophysiology underlying each PD/PU disorder
varies and depends on the particular syndrome at hand
(see Table 2.5.1). Any animal that is able to concentrate its
urine to >1.025 will usually not qualify as having a PD/PU
syndrome unless the increased thirst and urination are
periodic, which might characterize psychogenic polydipsia (Figure 2.5.3). A patient that shows no evidence of any
major underlying disease and no response to the water
deprivation test might be suspect for having diabetes
insipidus (Figure 2.5.4).

CLINICAL SIGNS

Figure 2.5.2 This cat was obviously polydipsic during its
physical examination.

K22463_C002.indd 33

Several disorders, such the syndromes of psychogenic
polydipsia, diabetes insipidus, and hyperadrenocorticism, will not characteristically result in a clinically ill
patient so long as water is available and the animal can
successfully imbibe and retain the water. Other conditions
that will eventually worsen to cause a clinically ill patient

25/04/16 10:11 am

34

General approach

Table 2.5.1 The causes and mechanisms of polydipsia and polyuria.
Disease

Mechanism of polydipsia/polyuria

Endogenous causes
Diabetes mellitus

Osmotic diuresis; hyperosmotic stimulation of the hypothalamic thirst center

Chronic kidney disease

Decreased nephron mass; dysfunctional renal medullary countercurrent multiplier

Hypoadrenocorticism

Renal sodium loss and impaired renal countercurrent multiplier

Hyperthyroidism

Hyperdynamic renal blood flow causing increased renal water filtration and impaired
medullary concentrating ability. Other factors: aquaporin downregulation and
decreased renal filtration fraction

Hyperadrenocorticism

Increase renal plasma blood flow; central thirst stimulation, distal renal tubular
resistance to ADH

Hypercalcemia

Nephrocalcinosis; renal distal tubular resistance to ADH

Pyometra

Uterine E. coli bacterial endotoxins impairing distal renal tubular response to ADH. In
some cases, antigen–antibody deposits along with impaired renal perfusion causing
acute kidney injury

Diabetes insipidus

Decreased ADH release from posterior pituitary or absent distal renal tubular and
collecting duct response to ADH

Chronic liver disease

Decreased urea synthesis impairing function of renal medullary countercurrent
multiplier; central thirst stimulation

Postobstructive (and postoliguric
kidney injury) diuresis

Solvent drag associated with the accumulated osmoles in the blood subsequently
being able to filter through the kidney.
Polydipsia due to the excessive water loss stimulating the hypothalamic osmoreceptors
and the thirst mechanism

Hypokalemia

Primary stimulation of thirst; diminished urine concentrating ability due to diminished
renal tubule response to ADH. The reason for the latter might be decreased expression
of aquaporin 2

Psychogenic polydipsia

Psychologically induced disturbance involving the hypothalamic thirst center

Exogenous causes
Diuretics

Various mechanisms affecting the absorption of electrolytes and water at specific
points along the nephron, depending on particular drug

Hyperosmotic solution infusions

Increased renal perfusion and accompanying solvent drag as seen with mannitol.
Hypertonic saline can increase the plasma osmolality and stimulate the thirst center in
the hypothalamus

Excessive parenteral fluid
administration

Increased renal blood flow and filtration causing water diuresis

Glucocorticoid drugs

Increased renal plasma flow causing increased glomerular filtration rate

Increased sodium chloride ingestion

Increased plasma space tonicity, increased thirst, and increased urination

ADH, antidiuretic hormone.

K22463_C002.indd 34

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

35

Table 2.5.2 Typical clinical features of the polydipsia/polyuria syndromes. (See specific chapters for details. Note that exact clinical
signs are subject to individual patient variation.)

Disease

Classic clinical features (not all signs necessarily present depending on stage of
disease)

Diabetes mellitus

PD/PU, eventually dehydration, weight loss, and vomiting, varying urine SG;
hyperglycemia, glycosuria, +/- hyperketonemia/hyperketonuria; other serum chemistry
abnormalities (hypokalemia, hyponatremia, hypophosphatemia); metabolic acidosis;
azotemia

Chronic renal disease

PD/PU with isosthenuria, weight loss, and dehydration at moderate and late stages,
vomiting, urine SG isosthenuric (1.008–1.012); azotemia; hyperphosphatemia, other
electrolyte abnormalities (hyper-, eu-, or hypokalemia, hyper- or hypocalcemia);
nonresponsive anemia

Hypoadrenocorticism

Progressive weakness and poor appetite, vomiting, diarrhea, weight loss and
dehydration, decreased vitality, hypovolemic shock in late stages, varying urine SG,
hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, hypochloremia, mild anemia, hypoproteinemia and
hypocholesterolemia, hypocortisolemia, ACTH stimulation test cortisol <1.0 µg/dl, ECG
abnormalities

Hyperthyroidism

Progressive weight loss despite increased appetite, heart rate normal or increased;
increased serum thyroxin; sometimes mild increased liver enzymes; sometimes mild
anemia

Hyperadrenocorticism

PD/PU, panting, dermatologic changes, abdominal distension, elevated liver enzymes
(especially serum alkaline phosphatase in dogs), lipid abnormalities, increased serum
cortisol to creatinine ratio, increased response to ACTH stimulation, impaired response
to dexamethasone suppression; increased plasma ACTH levels with pituitary origin and
low ACTH concentration with functional adrenal tumor origin

Hypercalcemia

PD/PU, lethargy, weakness, dehydration, vomiting, vague abdominal discomfort,
urinary calculi, hypercalcemia, hyper- or hypophosphatemia, increased or normal
serum PTH with primary hyperparathyroidism, low serum PTH with hypercalcemia of
malignancy, eventually azotemia and hyposthenuria or isosthenuria

Pyometra

PD/PU, dehydration, decreased appetite, purulent vaginal discharge with open
pyometra, uterine enlargement , leukocytosis, sometimes renal dysfunction, sometimes
overt sepsis and septic shock

Diabetes insipidus (DI)

Marked PD/PU, hyposthenuria (urine SG <1.008); no response to water deprivation.
Central DI will respond to ADH (Figure 2.5.4); nephrogenic form has no response
to ADH

Chronic liver disease

Decreased appetite and weight loss. Increases in serum liver enzyme tests,
hyperammonemia, decreased liver size, sometimes coagulopathy and anemia,
sometimes icterus

Hypokalemia

Low serum potassium (<3.5 mEq/l), skeletal and smooth muscle weakness, ECG
changes, features of underlying disease (diabetes mellitus, hyperaldosteronism,
metabolic alkalosis and its cause [gastric outflow obstruction], chronic kidney disease)

Postobstructive and postoliguric
kidney injury

Features of the underlying urinary tract disease, marked PD/PU

Psychogenic polydipsia

PD/PU; no other signs of organic disease; able to concentrate urine with water
deprivation test

ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; PTH, parathyroid hormone.

K22463_C002.indd 35

25/04/16 10:11 am

36

General approach

Table 2.5.3 PD/PU disorders that can rapidly progress to cause
severe clinical illness*.
Chronic renal disease
Diabetes mellitus
Hypoadrenocorticism
Pyometra
Hypercalcemia
Chronic liver disease
Extreme hypokalemia (serum K+ <2.5 mEq/l)
* These disorders can progress to cause sick, dehydrated,
anorectic animals unlike other PD/PU disorders such
as diabetes insipidus, psychogenic polydipsia, and
hyperadrenocorticism.

include renal failure, diabetic ketoacidosis, ­
pyometra,
hypercalcemia, hypoadrenocorticism, and chronic liver
disease. Some conditions can worsen to involve ­multiple
organ systems, which can cause the patient’s demise. One
of these is illustrated with diabetic ketoacidosis being
accompanied by AKI and sepsis.
Primary polydipsia occurs because of a defect involving the thirst center in the hypothalamus. In humans,
there can be underlying diseases such as mental disorders or diseases such as sarcoidosis that can impair
hypothalamic function and disrupt the thirst center.
Most of these patients, including dogs, are able to maintain ­
normal serum sodium concentrations because
they are able to excrete the extra water that they have
imbibed. In rare situations in humans, the polydipsia can overwhelm the kidney’s ability to excrete the
excess water, and this can result in water retention and
hyponatremia.
The characteristic features of each disorder are provided in Table 2.5.2. Urine SG determination is useful to
help identify the cause of PD/PU (Figure 2.5.5), although
its accurate application must always be used in light of
the accompanying clinical findings.

MANAGEMENT AND PROGNOSIS
A disorder such as psychogenic polydipsia has a very
good prognosis because it lacks any life-threatening
pathophysiology as compared with other causes of PD/
PU, such as renal failure and diabetic ketoacidosis,
which can ­progress to a clinically decompensated stage
and lead to the ultimate demise of the patient. A water
deprivation test should not be done until the patient

K22463_C002.indd 36

2.5.3

Figure 2.5.3 These two urine samples show urine concentration
ability after an 8-hour water deprivation test. The diagnosis was
psychogenic polydipsia. It is important to realize that actual
measurement of the urine SG is the only way to lend credence
to this empirical visual impression.

2.5.4

Figure 2.5.4 This series of urine-filled tubes show the results
of a positive ADH response test in a dog with central diabetes
insipidus. The most pale colored urine sample was the most
dilute while the progressively darker colored urine was more
concentrated when measured with a refractometer.

is first evaluated for other disorders causing PD/PU
because it can cause a negative water balance that
can have adverse effects on blood pressure and tissue
perfusion.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Dibartola SP (2012) Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid–base Disorders in
Small Animal Practice, 4th edn. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.
Rose DR, Post TW (2001) Clinical Physiology of Acid-base
Disorders, 5th edn. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Wang W, Li C, Summer SN et al. (2007) Polyuria of ­thyrotoxicosis:
downregulation of aquaporin water channels and increased
solute excretion. Kidney Int 72(9):1088–1094.

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

37

2.5.5

Water intake >90 ml/kg/day.
Urine production >45 ml/kg/day

USG >1.025

Consider psychogenic
polydipsia or no
PD/PU syndrome

USG <1.025

USG 1.008 –1.012

USG 1.001–1.007

Do WDT
Fixed USG

Able to concentrate
urine >1.025

Psychogenic
polydipsia

Unable to concentrate
urine; persists at
1.001–1.007

Chronic
kidney
disease

Central or nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus

Urine SG 1.013–1.025; usually
normal and not a PD/PU
syndrome; can be early renal
insufficiency in a cat

Variable USG;
might be able to
concentrate
on WDT

Hyperadrenocorticism,
hypoadrenalism, pyometra,
diabetes mellitus, chronic
liver disease, hypercalcemia

Administer ADH

Responds with
increased USG

No USG response
to ADH

Central
diabetes
insipidus

Nephrogenic
diabetes
insipidus

Figure 2.5.5 This algorithm demonstrates how to identify the polydipsia/polyuria syndromes using urine SG determination.
WDT, water deprivation test; USG, urine specific gravity; ADH, antidiuretic hormone.

K22463_C002.indd 37

25/04/16 10:11 am

This page intentionally left blank

39

Chapter 2

Common clinical problems

2.6 Diarrhea
Frédéric Gaschen

INTRODUCTION
Diarrhea is characterized by decreased fecal consistency,
increased fecal volume, and/or increased defecation
frequency.
Animals with diarrhea all have intestinal dysfunction
due to primary intestinal disease or secondary intestinal involvement associated with disorders originating
outside the intestine. The clinical signs vary depending on whether the disease primarily originates in
the small intestine or in the colon (Table 2.6.1, Figures
2.6.1–2.6.6). However, in some instances, diarrhea may
not be observed even if the animal suffers from intestinal

disease. This occurs frequently in cats with inflammatory
bowel ­disease (IBD) or alimentary lymphoma affecting
the small intestine. They may present with weight loss,
dysorexia, lethargy, and/or vomiting without diarrhea
in spite of significant involvement of their intestinal
mucosa.
Secondary signs that may occur in diarrheic animals
include dehydration, lethargy, dysorexia, abdominal
pain, borborygmi, flatulence, hematochezia, melena,
and anal/perianal irritation. Animals with chronic small
intestinal diarrhea may present with weight loss (including loss of muscle mass) and possibly ascites in case of
significant intestinal protein loss.

Table 2.6.1 Clinical signs associated with small and large bowel diarrhea.
Clinical sign

Small intestinal disease

Large intestinal disease

Frequency of defecation

Normal or only slightly increased

Moderately to severely increased

Fecal volume per defecation

Normal to large

Small

Presence of mucus

No

Common

Presence of blood

Melena (digested blood); possibly
hematemesis

Hematochezia (fresh blood)

Steatorrhea

Possible

No

Tenesmus

No

Common

Urgency

No

Common

Dyschezia

No

Common

Flatulence, borborygmi

Possible

Uncommon

General condition

May be decreased (lethargy)

Usually unchanged

Appetite

Dysorexia common

Usually unchanged

Abdominal discomfort

Possible

Possible

Vomiting

Relatively common

Possible but occasional

Weight loss

Common (if chronic)

Uncommon

Note: Commonly, the disease process may involve both the small and large intestine and affected animals present with a mixture
of clinical signs indicating small and large bowel diarrhea.

K22463_C002.indd 39

25/04/16 10:11 am

40

General approach

2.6.1

2.6.3

Figure 2.6.1 A 4-year-old male neutered Weimaraner with
dietary indiscretion and bloody diarrhea.

2.6.2

Figure 2.6.3 Hematochezia with soft stool in a dog with ­
diet-responsive chronic enteropathy.

2.6.4

Figure 2.6.2 Liquid diarrhea of small bowel origin in a cat with
inflammatory bowel disease.

K22463_C002.indd 40

Figure 2.6.4 Melena and diarrhea in a Boxer with GI bleeding
secondary to duodenal adenocarcinoma. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

2.6.5

41

Osmotic diarrhea
Osmotic diarrhea occurs in the presence of large, poorly
absorbable osmotically active molecules such as undigested carbohydrates, solutes that may additionally
undergo fermentation by intestinal microbiota. These
molecules ultimately result in a lack of water absorption
and loss of water and nutrients in the feces. Osmotic diarrhea may occur following dietary indiscretion and with
maldigestion secondary to exocrine pancreatic insufficiency or severe intestinal mucosal inflammation. Unlike
most other forms of diarrhea, it typically resolves after
the affected animal is fasted.

Secretory diarrhea
Figure 2.6.5 Cow-pat-like feces from a 9-month-old Mastiff
with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
2.6.6

Secretory diarrhea is the result of activation of cellular
pathways leading to the secretion of electrolytes and
water by the enterocytes. Inflammatory cytokines, fatty
acids, bile acids, and bacterial endotoxins may trigger
this pathway. IBD and enteropathogenic E. coli may elicit
diarrhea through this pathway.

Increased mucosal permeability
This results from a loss of integrity of the intestinal
mucosal barrier, which may occur through loss of enterocytes (erosive or ulcerative intestinal disease) or compromise of paracellular structures such as the tight junctions
connecting the enterocytes. Examples of diseases include
parvovirus infection, IBD, alimentary lymphoma, and
protein-losing enteropathy (PLE).

Abnormal intestinal motility
This develops in the presence of mucosal inflammation.
Giant aboral contractions (small intestine) and giant
migrating contractions (colon) are common and may
severely shorten intestinal transit times.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
Figure 2.6.6 Mucoid feces from a dog with chronic idiopathic
colitis.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The following mechanisms are commonly involved in
the pathogenesis of diarrhea. In many instances, several
mechanisms contribute concurrently to the onset of diarrhea in intestinal diseases.

K22463_C002.indd 41

There are a myriad of possible causes for diarrhea in
dogs and cats. Therefore, it is meaningful to differentiate
acute from chronic diarrhea and young from adult animals when preparing a list of differential diagnoses. In
­addition, the environment plays an important role: dogs
and cats in group housing are more susceptible to developing infectious diseases (animal shelters, ­boarding facilities, breeding facilities). Common ­differential ­diagnoses
for dogs and cats with acute and chronic ­diarrhea are
summarized in Tables 2.6.2 and 2.6.3.

25/04/16 10:11 am

42

General approach

Table 2.6.2 Common causes of acute diarrhea in dogs and cats.
Dog

Cat

Viral

Parvovirus*, coronavirus*

Parvovirus*, FeLV, FIV

Bacterial

Campylobacter spp., Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium
difficile, E. coli, Salmonella spp., Neorickettsia heminthoeca@

Campylobacter spp., E. coli, Salmonella spp.,
Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium difficile

Parasitic

Nematodes (roundworms, hookworms, and whipworms)

Nematodes (roundworms and hookworms)

Protozoa: coccidia (Isospora spp.*,
Cryptosporidium spp.), Giardia spp.

Protozoa: coccidia, (Isospora spp.*,
Cryptosporidium spp.), Giardia spp., Tritrichomonas
fetus#

Diet

Dietary indiscretion, abrupt diet change

Abrupt diet change, dietary indiscretion

Toxins, drugs

Numerous plants, drugs (especially antimicrobials),
chemicals

Numerous plants, drugs, chemicals

Idiopathic

Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis, also known as acute
hemorrhagic diarrhea syndrome

Diseases
originating
outside the
intestine

Pancreatitis, liver disease, kidney disease, toxemia, sepsis

Infectious

Pancreatitis, liver disease, kidney disease,
toxemia, sepsis

*, puppies and kittens;
@
, in endemic areas;
#
, young cats, multi-cat housing.

Table 2.6.3 Common causes of chronic diarrhea in dogs and cats.
Dog

Cat

Bacterial

Campylobacter spp., Clostridium perfringens,
Clostridium difficile, E. coli, Salmonella spp.,
Neorickettsia helmintheca@

Campylobacter spp., E. coli, Salmonella spp.,
Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium difficile

Fungal, algal

Histoplasma capsulatum@, Prototheca spp.@

Parasitic

Nematodes (round, hook and whipworms),
Heterobilharzia americana@

Nematodes (round and hookworms)

Protozoa: coccidia (Isospora spp.*, Cryptosporidium
spp.), Giardia spp.

Protozoa: coccidia, (Isospora spp.*,
Cryptosporidium spp.), Giardia spp., Tritrichomonas
fetus#

Diet

Diet-responsive diarrhea

Diet-responsive diarrhea

Dysbiosis

Antibiotic-responsive diarrhea

K22463_C002.indd 42

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

Chronic
inflammation

Dog

Cat

Inflammatory bowel disease, granulomatous colitiso

Inflammatory bowel disease

Neoplasia

43

Low-grade alimentary lymphoma

Idiopathic diseases

Idiopathic intestinal lymphangiectasia, lymphoma

Diseases originating
outside the intestine

Atypical hypoadrenocorticism, exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency, chronic pancreatitis, liver disease,
kidney disease

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, chronic
pancreatitis, liver disease, kidney disease

*, puppies and kittens;
#
, young cats, multi-cat housing;
@
, in endemic areas;
o
, Boxers and Bulldogs.

2.6.7

2.6.8

Figure 2.6.7 Liquid bloody diarrhea from a puppy with
parvovirus infection. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Acute diarrhea
In young dogs and cats, acute diarrhea is often caused
by enteric infections, and parvovirus infection is an obligate initial rule out in puppies/kittens presenting with
acute-onset vomiting and bloody diarrhea (Figure 2.6.7).
Additionally, parasitic infestations with nematodes
(e.g. roundworms, hookworms, whipworms) or protozoa
(e.g. various coccidia, Giardia) are very frequent causes
of acute diarrhea. Alternatively, diarrhea may also be
dietary in origin (dietary overload, dietary indiscretion,
abrupt change in diet).
In adult dogs and cats, parasitic and dietary causes of
diarrhea are also very common and need to be ruled out
early in the diagnostic process. Acute flare-ups of chronic

K22463_C002.indd 43

Figure 2.6.8 Liquid bloody diarrhea from a mixed-breed dog
with hemorrhagic gastroenteritis/acute hemorrhagic diarrhea
syndrome.

recurring diarrhea should be differentiated from truly
acute disease. Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis (HGE), also
called acute hemorrhagic diarrhea syndrome (AHDS),
is a disease of unknown etiology that typically affects
middle aged dogs of small and toy breeds (Figure 2.6.8),

25/04/16 10:11 am

44

General approach

but large-breed dogs can be affected as well. Severe cases
may have a fatal outcome without aggressive treatment.
The role of bacterial enteropathogens is difficult to
establish definitely since these bacteria and their toxins
have been detected in similar amounts in the feces of
young and adult healthy and diarrheic animals. However,
bacterial infections should be considered in animals held
in groups (kennels, cattery, breeder) and in cases that are
refractory to usual treatment.

Chronic diarrhea
As is the case with acute diarrhea, parasites (nematodes
and protozoa) are also very frequently involved, and the
precise role of bacterial enteropathogens remains unclear
(see above).
Chronic enteropathies (CEs) are associated with intestinal mucosal inflammation. A complex relationship
exists between the intestinal microbiota and the host
immune system in the gut. This equilibrium is disrupted
in chronic intestinal diseases, and additional factors such
as dietary antigens may also contribute to the resulting
­inflammation. Considerable and long-lasting changes in
the composition of the microbiota have been documented
in dogs and cats with CE. The differential diagnoses of
canine CE include diet-responsive diarrhea, antibiotic-­
responsive diarrhea (most common in young ­
large
breed dogs such as German Shepherd Dogs), and IBD.
­Diet-responsive disease and IBD are also very common
causes of feline CE, and must be differentiated from lowgrade alimentary lymphoma, which may present with
similar clinical signs.

CLINICAL APPROACH
A thorough history should be obtained that includes a
description of the onset and duration of diarrhea, appearance of the feces, description of defecation, including
frequency, and clinical course of the disease. Acute and
new problems should be differentiated from recurrent or
chronic issues. Additionally, the presence of factors that
may trigger the development of diarrhea, such as dietary
changes or administration of drugs such as antibiotics or
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), should
be discussed. Anthelmintic treatment and vaccination
history should be obtained. The owner should also be
asked if other animals in the household have the same
signs and if the diarrheic dog/cat also shows additional
signs such as hyporexia, vomiting, weight loss, polydipsia, and polyuria.

K22463_C002.indd 44

Acute diarrhea
At the time of initial presentation, puppies and kittens
that could have highly contagious parvovirus infection should be identified on the basis of clinical signs
and absent/incomplete vaccination status. They should
be immediately triaged and screened for the presence
of viral antigen in the feces. Cage-side fecal tests have
excellent specificity, and positive animals should be isolated from the rest of the hospital population while they
receive treatment. However, fecal antigen test sensitivity
is good but not perfect, and a negative result does not rule
out the presence of virus. Consequently, in unvaccinated
or incompletely vaccinated animals, suggestive clinical
signs are sufficient to justify isolation.
In adult animals, acute diarrhea is often self-limiting,
particularly if the underlying problem (parasites, diet) can
be eliminated. Feces should be collected for parasitological testing (e.g. direct smear, zinc sulfate flotation, Giardia
ELISA). Alternatively, a broad-spectrum anthelmintic
drug such as fenbendazole can be administered empirically (50 mg/kg PO q24h for 3 days). Further diagnostic
tests such as screening for additional infectious diseases
may be indicated in kennel, cattery, or shelter situations.
Treatment is supportive and focused on fluid therapy
to address dehydration, the most common complication
of acute diarrhea. Dogs and cats with limited systemic
repercussions of diarrhea and mild dehydration may benefit from oral and SC fluids; however, lethargic, anorexic,
and moderately to severely dehydrated animals require
IV fluid therapy designed to rapidly and efficiently correct existing fluid and electrolyte deficits. In severe cases,
significant protein loss into the intestinal lumen may
occur because of the severely compromised intestinal
barrier and may justify the use of IV colloids.
All animals with acute diarrhea generally benefit from
a 12-hour fasting period followed by frequent small meals
consisting of easily digestible food (commercial ‘intestinal’ diet or home prepared boiled chicken breast and rice)
for 3–5 days before being progressively reintroduced to
their regular diet. Importantly, young puppies and kittens
should not be systematically fasted as they may become
hypoglycemic if not fed regularly. Antidiarrheal drugs are
rarely necessary in small animals with acute diarrhea.
Loperamide, an opiate agonist that does not cross the
blood–brain barrier, may be considered (0.1–0.2 mg/kg
PO q8h as needed) in animals with particularly severe
disease and significant abdominal pain. Antimicrobials
are generally not recommended in the treatment of acute
diarrhea, except in the presence of severely compromised

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

mucosal barrier and evidence of severe systemic repercussions such as severe depression, marked leukocytosis, or leukopenia, or in shelter animals. In a few clinical
studies, probiotics have been documented to shorten the
time to passage of normal feces and the time to discharge.
A 2–4-week week treatment extending well beyond
expected clinical recovery is generally recommended.

Chronic diarrhea
Dogs and cats with small or large bowel diarrhea and
absent or minimal systemic repercussions (e.g. lethargy, dysorexia, weight loss) benefit from a sequential approach using various empirical treatment trials
(Box 2.6.1). First and foremost, intestinal parasites must
be eliminated using a broad-spectrum anthelmintic drug
such as fenbendazole (50 mg/kg PO q24h for 3 days). Then
a dietary trial using either a novel protein or a hydrolyzed peptide commercial diet should be implemented.
Clinical studies have shown that 50–65% of dogs and
cats with chronic diarrhea respond to such a dietary
trial within 1–2 weeks. The proportion of responders is
even higher among young large breed dogs with mostly

Box 2.6.1 Approach to chronic diarrhea in dogs with
minimal or absent systemic signs. While a sequential
application of the following steps is theoretically preferable,
they can also be combined (e.g. parasiticide and diet
initiated at the same time).
1. Rule out intestinal parasites
Repeated parasite screenings and/or treatment with
broad-spectrum anthelmintic drug (e.g. fenbendazole
50 mg/kg q24h for 3 days).
2. Rule out diet-responsive enteropathy
Elimination trial with ‘hypoallergenic’ diet; a response
should be seen within 2 weeks. In case of failure, some
cases may benefit from a second trial with a different diet:
○○ Novel protein diet (based on patient’s dietary history)
or
○○ Hydrolyzed peptide diet.
3. Rule out antibiotic-responsive enteropathy
Administer tylosin (10–20 mg/kg PO q12h), or
metronidazole (10–15 mg/kg PO q12h), or other antibiotic
of choice; a response should be seen within 2 weeks. If
successful, treatment should be pursued for 4–8 weeks.
4. If none of the above approaches works, obtain a minimal
database with CBC, biochemistry panel, urinalysis, and
abdominal ultrasound. Finally, endoscopy and ­intestinal
biopsy or full-thickness surgically obtained intestinal
biopsies might be required for a histopathologic
diagnosis.

K22463_C002.indd 45

45

large bowel diarrhea. Animals that do not respond to the
dietary trial should receive antimicrobials in an attempt
to correct chronic idiopathic dysbiosis, which represented
approximately 10–15% of all dogs with chronic CE in one
clinical study. Tylosin (10–20 mg/kg PO q12h) or metronidazole (10–15 mg/kg PO q12h) is often used for the treatment of antibiotic-responsive diarrhea (ARD). Recently,
concerns have been raised regarding the rising resistance of fecal bacteria to metronidazole, and the author
currently recommends tylosin as the best first-line option
for ARD. Additionally, while there are still only a few clinical studies documenting the benefits of probiotics in the
treatment of canine CE, the results are promising, and
probiotics should be considered in the treatment of clinical cases. Prolonged administration is generally recommended (4–8 weeks). Finally, if empirical treatment is not
successful, a full work up is indicated (see below).
In sick dogs and cats with chronic diarrhea and dysorexia, lethargy, weight loss, or ascites, a more aggressive approach is recommended. This includes a minimal
database with CBC, biochemical profile, and urinalysis,
as well as abdominal ultrasound if available. Depending
on the severity of disease, these tests may reveal an
inflammatory leukogram, panhypoproteinemia (hypoalbuminemia and hypoglobulinemia), and increased liver
enzymes. Abdominal ultrasound may document intestinal wall lesions in all or select segments of the intestine.
In parallel to the diagnostic plan, correction of fluid and
electrolyte deficits may be required. Ultimately, intestinal
mucosal biopsies may need to be collected endoscopically
or surgically and evaluated histologically. In severely
debilitated patients that are poor anesthetic risks or in
cases with financial limitations, a carefully designed
treatment trial for the most likely cause of the chronic
diarrhea can be initiated if indicated (for further details
see Chapter 8, Digestive diseases [pharynx to rectum]).
The recommended approach to chronic large bowel
diarrhea is illustrated in the algorithm (Figure 2.6.9).

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Baral RM (2012) Approach to the cat with diarrhea. In: The Cat:
Clinical Medicine and Management. (ed. SE Little) Elsevier
Saunders, St. Louis, pp. 459–465.
Marks SL (2013) Diarrhea. In: Canine and Feline Gastroenterology.
(eds. RJ Washabau, MJ Day) Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis,
pp. 99–108.
Willard MD (2010) Diarrhea. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 7th edn. (eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman) Saunders
Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 200–202.

25/04/16 10:11 am

46

General approach

2.6.9

Intermittent/persistent
chronic large bowel disease

r/o Intestinal parasites
Fecal parasitology, treatment trial with
fenbendazole

Cat

Dog

r/o Diet-responsive colitis
Elimination trial
Consider fiber supplementation

r/o Diet‐responsive colitis
Elimination trial
Consider fiber supplementation

No success
r/o Concurrent
small intestinal disease
Physical examination,
abdominal ultrasound, CBC,
chemistry panel, serum
cobalamin concentration

Consider endoscopy and
biopsy
Adapted therapy, including
steroids if required

r/o T. foetus
Young cats in
multi‐cat households

No success
Boxer or
Bulldog

r/o Granulomatous colitis
Consider empirical treatment
with fluoroquinolones,
abdominal ultrasound,
colonoscopy, and biopsies,
then treat with fluoroquinolones

No success
Consider full‐thickness
intestinal biopsies
(celiotomy) to r/o alimentary
lymphoma

Consider colonic
dysfunction

Other canine
breed

r/o Colonic IBD
Sulfasalazine trial
Fiber supplementation
No success

No success

Colonoscopy and biopsies
to r/o neoplasia
Adapted treatment,
including steroids if
required
No success

No success
Consider other
immunosuppressive
drugs (e.g. cyclosporine,
azathioprine)

Figure 2.6.9 Clinical approach in cats and dogs with intermittent or persistent chronic large bowel diarrhea. r/o, rule out.

K22463_C002.indd 46

25/04/16 10:11 am

47

Chapter 2

Common clinical problems

2.7 Icterus
Julien Dandrieux

INTRODUCTION
Icterus (or jaundice) is a clinical finding that is characterized by the yellow discoloration of tissues (including sclerae, mucous membranes, and skin) and body
fluids (such as plasma and urine) secondary to hyperbilirubinemia and bile pigment deposition. The following text will outline the diagnostic approach to the
icteric patient; the reader is referred to the chapters
discussing anemia and liver and biliary disease for an
in-depth ­
discussion of the different diseases or their
treatment.
In the normal physiologic state, bilirubin is constantly
produced from the degradation of heme (contained
principally in hemoglobin, but also in other hemoproteins) by phagocytes in the liver, spleen, and bone marrow. Hydrophobic unconjugated ­bilirubin (uB) is produced
and transported in the plasma n
­ oncovalently bound to
albumin. Bilirubin is taken up by the hepatocytes and
conjugated to a hydrophilic form (cB), which can then be
excreted through the ­biliary system into the intestinal
lumen. The excretion of cB is the ­rate-limiting step. cB is
­further metabolized by intestinal bacteria and is the origin of the normal color of feces (stercobilin). Acholic feces
(pale to white in color) can sometimes be seen in animals
with lack of cB secretion in the intestine due to ­complete
extrahepatic bile duct obstruction (EBDO).
If cB cannot be excreted into the biliary system, it will
backflow in the blood and be excreted in the urine. Renal
tubular resorption of bilirubin in dogs is very limited,
which explains why bilirubinuria can precede hyperbilirubinemia. Furthermore, dogs (male more than female)
have the capacity to process heme in the renal tubules
to uB, and then cB. For this reason, mild bilirubinuria is
often detected in healthy dogs with a urine SG of 1.025–
1.040 (1+) or moderate levels with a SG higher than 1.040
(up to 2+). Cats have a higher capacity for tubular resorption and are not able to process bilirubin in their kidneys; for these reasons bilirubinuria is always considered
pathologic in this species.

K22463_C002.indd 47

Bilirubin can be found in a third form: covalently bound
to albumin (albB, also called delta-bilirubin or ­biliprotein).
This form occurs spontaneously in disease, but is not present in healthy animals. The half-life of albB is the same as
albumin (about 8 days in dogs) and can be the reason why
jaundice may persist in some animals after resolution of
the cause. It needs to be considered in a patient that is
clinically improving despite persistent icterus.
Urobilinogen is a colorless compound formed from the
degradation of bilirubin in the intestine and passively
absorbed by the small bowel mucosa. The fraction that
is not removed from the portal blood by hepatocytes
enters the blood and is excreted in the urine. Urobilinogen
is detected in the urine with a dipstick reagent. Increased
levels can accompany hemolytic and hepatobiliary diseases, but the test is not commonly used because of its
nonspecific interpretation.
In summary, bilirubin in a healthy animal predominantly consists of uB with negligible concentrations of
cB and albB.

ETIOLOGY
Hyperbilirubinemia can occur either when the rate of uB
production exceeds the rate of uB uptake in the ­hepatocytes
(hemolysis), when uB is not converted to cB or transported
into the biliary tract (hepatic ­
insufficiency), or when
the rate of cB formation exceeds the rate of cB excretion in
the bile (biliary tract disease). The main causes for icterus
can be summarized as follows:

●● Prehepatic icterus: increase in red blood cell
destruction.

●● Hepatic icterus: liver insufficiency.
●● Posthepatic icterus: obstruction at the level of the biliary system (intra- or extrahepatic) or rupture of the
biliary tree.
●● Other causes: sepsis (cholestasis induced by tumor
necrosis factor alpha and endotoxin), resorption of
large hematomas (rare).

25/04/16 10:11 am

48

General approach

CLINICAL APPROACH TO THE ICTERIC
PATIENT
The icteric patient can be identified on physical examination or by the color of its plasma or serum (Figures 2.7.1,
2.7.2). Concentrations at which jaundice become visible in
different locations are summarized in Table 2.7.1.
The first step after detection of icterus on physical
examination is to inquire about possible toxic or infectious causes with a thorough history including vaccination status and travel history (common causes are listed
in Table 2.7.2).

2.7.1

Figure 2.7.1 Icteric sclera in a dog with immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia secondary to lymphoma. Note the bright
yellow color of the sclera.

2.7.2

The second step is to determine whether other abnormalities are present on physical examination. A good
body condition score is suggestive of an acute disease
(e.g. acute cholangiohepatitis, hemolytic anemia, hepatic
toxic insult) whereas a poor body condition score suggests chronic disease (e.g. chronic cholangiohepatitis,
neoplastic process, end-stage liver disease). Generalized
peripheral lymphadenomegaly is suggestive of infectious
disease or lymphoma and fine-needle aspiration and
cytologic evaluation can help in reaching a diagnosis. If
ascites is present, fluid sampling for analysis should be
done. Findings such as septic peritonitis or bile peritonitis
secondary to biliary tree rupture are strong indications
for exploratory laparotomy. Splenomegaly and hepatomegaly are common findings with prehepatic icterus
secondary to extramedullary hematopoiesis, which can
accompany immune-mediated diseases, but it can also be
seen with neoplastic or infectious diseases.
Laboratory testing, including hematology, biochemistry, and urinalysis, is the next step to determine the
cause of the icterus and typical findings are outlined in
Figure 2.7.3. If liver disease or complete EBDO is suspected, a coagulation profile including fibrinogen concentration is recommended prior to taking biopsies, as
coagulopathies may develop secondary to these conditions. Moderate to marked anemia is expected with prehepatic icterus, and should become regenerative within
3–5 days, whereas anemia is usually only mild and nonregenerative with primary hepatic or posthepatic causes.
In an animal with icterus of hepatic origin, hepatocellular
enzymes (ALT and AST) are expected to be increased to a
higher magnitude than biliary epithelium enzymes (ALP
Table 2.7.1 Interpretation of bilirubinuria and plasma
thresholds for detection of icterus.

Where

Figure 2.7.2 Icteric plasma. Picture of microhematocrit tubes
from the same dog as in Figure 2.7.1 after centrifugation. The
yellow discoloration of the serum is evident and is detectable
at lower bilirubin concentrations than are necessary to detect
icteric sclera.

K22463_C002.indd 48

Concentration/degree of bilirubinuria
or bilirubinemia*

Urine

Cat: any degree is abnormal.
Dog: up to 2+ bilirubin with SG >1.040
can be normal. Bilirubinuria can
precede hyperbilirubinemia

Serum or plasma

>0.9 mg/dl (15 µmol/l)

Sclera

>1.5 mg/dl (25 µmol/l)

Mucous
membrane
(nonpigmented)

>2.6 mg/dl (45 µmol/l)

* These are not absolute values and the threshold for visual
detection of icterus varies between individuals.

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

49

Table 2.7.2 Common causes of icterus in dogs (D) and cats (C).
Type

Toxin

Infection

Others

Prehepatic → hemolysis

Copper; drugs
(acetaminophen/paracetamol
[C, HB]; fenbendazole); onions
(HB); zinc (HB)

Dirofilaria (caval syndrome [D]);
Cytauxzoon felis (C)

DIC; erythrocyte
congenital defect (e.g.
PFK); hypophosphatemia
(C>D); neoplasia (e.g.
hemangiosarcoma)

Prehepatic →
immune-mediated
hemolysis

Drugs (cephalosporin,
penicillin, potentiated
sulfonamides)

Babesia (D); Ehrlichia (D); FeLV
(C); hemotropic Mycoplasma
spp. (C)

Blood transfusion; idiopathic
IMHA (D>C); neoplasia (e.g.
lymphoma); inflammation (e.g.
pancreatitis, prostatitis)

Hepatic

Aflatoxins; mushrooms
(Amanita spp.); blue–green
algae; copper accumulation;
drugs (acetaminophen/
paracetamol [C>D], diazepam
[C], ketoconazole, itraconazole,
lomustine, methimazole [C],
NSAIDs [D], phenobarbital,
trimethoprim–sulfonamide);
sago palm; xylitol (D)

Virulent calicivirus (C);
coronavirus (C); canine
adenovirus (D); Histoplasma
capsulatum; Leishmania (D);
Leptospira (D); Toxoplasma
(C>D)

End-stage chronic liver
disease; heat stroke; hepatic
lipidosis (C); hepatitis/
cholangiohepatitis; neoplasia
(carcinoma, lymphoma)

Liver flukes (C)

Cholecystitis; cholelithiasis;
gallbladder rupture;
gallbladder mucocoele
(D); neoplasia (biliary
adenocarcinoma); pancreatitis

Posthepatic

DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; FeLV, feline leukemia virus; HB, formation of Heinz bodies; IMHA, immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia; PFK, phosphofructokinase deficiency.

and GGT), whereas the opposite is expected with a post-­
hepatic icterus. Liver functional parameters (albumin,
urea, cholesterol, and glucose) might also be decreased
with significant loss of liver function. These parameters
are expected to be normal with posthepatic obstruction, with the exception of cholesterol, which will be
increased (cholestatic disease). Although these changes
can help determine the origin of the icterus, they have
many ­limitations. For example, prehepatic icterus often
causes hepatic hypoxia with increases in ALT and AST.
The serum activity of these two enzymes might normalize in end-stage liver disease because of the decrease in
functional tissue. Additionally, hepatocytes will often be
affected by processes causing posthepatic icterus over
time, resulting in increases in ALT and AST. Therefore, all
abnormal test results must be interpreted within the context of the patient and its stage of disease.
Prehepatic icterus should be suspected in the presence of moderate to severe anemia, which is usually

K22463_C002.indd 49

regenerative within 3–5 days of onset. The next ­diagnostic
step is to determine its origin. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) is a common cause of hemolysis. Dogs
are more prone to primary (idiopathic) IMHA and cats
to secondary IMHA from a variety of primary diseases.
Imaging and testing for different infectious d
­ iseases,
depending on the travel history and geographic location
of the animal, is indicated.
Imaging modalities, particularly abdominal ultrasound, are very useful for differentiating hepatic from
posthepatic icterus (Figure 2.7.4). Abdominal ultrasound
can help confirm the location of the problem and suggest
possible causes such as microhepatica in end-stage liver
disease, changes in liver echogenicity or outline with
infiltrative disease (Figure 2.7.5), or dilation of the common bile duct with long-standing posthepatic obstruction
(Figures 2.7.6, 2.7.7). Abdominal ultrasound is also useful
for collecting samples for cytology, histology, and culture,
as indicated, to obtain a final diagnosis (Figure 2.7.8),

25/04/16 10:11 am

50

General approach

2.7.3

Icterus identified on
physical examination

Hematocrit
Moderate or marked
decrease
(usually regenerative)
± spherocytes
± auto‐agglutination
± positive Coombs test
± hemoglobinemia and
hemoglobinuria

Normal or mild
decrease
(usually nonregenerative)

ALT, AST: 
ALP, GGT: 

ALT, AST: 
ALP, GGT: 

Alb, Chol, Glc, urea 

Chol: 
Alb, Glc, urea: WNL

Hepatic

Posthepatic

Prehepatic
(hemolysis)

Figure 2.7.3 Flow chart showing the findings on laboratory blood work that can help determine the origin of icterus. Alb,
albumin; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ALT, alanine transaminase; AST, aspartate transaminase; Chol, cholesterol; GGT, gammaglutamyltransferase; Glc, glucose; WNL, within normal limits; ↑, relative increase; ↓, relative decrease. See text for limitations in the
interpretation. Further work up is then needed to determine the disease process.

2.7.4

Imaging

Radiography

Thorax

Ultrasound

Abdomen

Abdominal organs

Sampling options

Liver size, contour

Liver contour, focal or
diffuse parenchymal
change, echogenicity

Lymphadenomegaly

Mineralization (liver,
gallbladder, cholelith)

Gallbladder and
biliary tree

Needle biopsies

Pulmonary
involvement
(diffuse disease)

Organomegaly

Pancreas

Ascites and/or
bile sampling for
analysis ± culture

Ascites

Other abnormalities

Metastasis

Fine‐needle
aspirate

Ascites, acquired
portosystemic shunt

Figure 2.7.4 Flow chart showing the imaging modalities for the work up of the icteric patient. Radiographs are an adequate first
step to get an overview of the abdominal organs and the chest, if a systemic disease is suspected. Ultrasound can be very helpful,
but yields are dependent on machine quality and operator. It allows targeted sampling.

K22463_C002.indd 50

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

51

2.7.5

2.7.7

Figure 2.7.5 Ultrasonographic appearance of the liver in a
dog presented with icterus. The parenchyma is heterogeneous
with hyper- and hypoechoic nodules. (Courtesy D. Tyrell)
Fine-needle aspirates were taken and the cytology is depicted
in Figure 2.7.8.

Figure 2.7.7 Ultrasound image of the common bile duct in an
icteric cat. Anatomically, the duodenum, pancreas, and common
bile duct (CBD) are in close contact with each other, as can be
appreciated on this ultrasound picture. This explains how a
severe pancreatitis can lead to development of icterus. Note
in this patient that the CBD is markedly enlarged (16.9 mm,
normal is less than 3 mm). (Courtesy C. Beck)

2.7.6

2.7.8

Figure 2.7.6 Ultrasound image of the liver in an icteric cat.
The neck of the gallbladder is on the left hand side of the
picture with the common bile duct (CBD) extending towards
the right (arrow). The duodenum can also be seen on the
right (arrow head). The dilation of the CBD is consistent with a
posthepatic obstruction. (Courtesy D. Tyrell)

although in some cases surgical biopsies are preferred.
Other modalities such as CT, nuclear imaging, and MRI
may be helpful in complex cases, if these options are
available.
If neoplasia is high on the list of differentials, chest
radiographs or CT should be considered to screen for
metastasis.

K22463_C002.indd 51

Figure 2.7.8 Cytologic slide from a fine-needle liver aspirate in
an icteric dog (from the dog in Figure 2.7.5). Hepatocytes can be
seen in the bottom left corner displaying marked vacuolation.
A population of large atypical round cells with round nuclei
containing fine chromatin and a thin rim of cytoplasm is also
present. These cells are consistent with lymphoma. (Courtesy
C. Connolly)

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Stockham SL, Scott MA (2008) Erythrocytes. In: Fundamentals of
Veterinary Clinical Pathology, 2nd edn. (eds. SL Stockham, MA
Scott) Blackwell Publishing, Ames, p. 114.
Stockham SL, Scott MA (2008) Urinary system. In: Fundamentals
of Veterinary Clinical Pathology, 2nd edn. (eds. SL Stockham,
MA Scott) Blackwell Publishing, Ames, pp. 466–467.

25/04/16 10:11 am

52

General approach

Stockham SL, Scott MA (2008) Liver function. In: Fundamentals
of Veterinary Clinical Pathology, 2nd edn. (eds. SL Stockham,
MA Scott) Blackwell Publishing, Ames, pp. 681–690.
Watson PJ (2014) Diagnostics tests for the hepatobiliary system.
In: Small Animal Internal Medicine, 5th edn. (eds. RW Nelson,
CG Couto) Elsevier Mosby, St. Louis, pp. 512–535.

K22463_C002.indd 52

Webster CRL (2010) History, clinical signs, and physical findings
in hepatobiliary disease. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 7th edn. (eds. ST Ettinger, EC Feldman) Elsevier
Saunders, St. Louis, pp. 1612–1625.

25/04/16 10:11 am

53

Chapter 2

Common clinical problems

2.8 Cough
Elizabeth Rozanski
INTRODUCTION
Cough is a common presenting complaint for dogs and,
to a lesser extent, cats. Cough is a sign of an underlying
disorder, not a primary disease. Therefore, the cause of
the cough should be identified and the underlying disease, not just the cough, should be treated if possible. In
some cases the cause of cough may be simple to identify
and easy to correct, such as kennel cough. In other cases,
the cough may be multi-factorial or relatively resistant
to therapy.
Cough is defined as a sudden expiratory effort producing a noisy expulsion of air from the lungs. A cough
usually signals an effort to clear the lungs of real or imagined foreign material. Cough can be productive or dry,
although it may be at times hard for owners to determine
if the cough is productive, as animals rarely expectorate
and tend to swallow any mucus that is produced. A cough
can be classified as acute or chronic. A cough is considered chronic if it lasts for 2 months or longer.
Most coughing in animals is presumed to be an involuntary response. Stimuli to cough include pressure on
the outside of the airway, presence of foreign material
or perception of foreign matter, excessive secretions, or
recurrent aspiration. Coughing can become apparently
habitual in some dogs. Interestingly, and in contrast to
people, cough is hard to induce in healthy dogs. Cough
serves as an important function both by aiding in the
clearance of foreign debris and by enhancing the actions
of the mucociliary elevator. The cough reflex is the primary defense mechanism to prevent aspiration of large
particles or debris.

ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Historical information and a description of the cough
may help to pinpoint the etiology. The patient’s geographic history is important when considering certain
of the systemic mycoses (e.g. coccidioidomycosis [western
arid United States]; blastomycosis and histoplasmosis
[midwestern and southeastern United States]). The status of heartworm prevention is extremely important to
know in heartworm endemic regions. Cough may also be

K22463_C002.indd 53

classified as to a specific time of day (e.g. night, morning)
or coupled with an event such as drinking, eating, running, or pulling on a leash. Coughing at night time may
result in more complaints due to inference with the owner’s own sleep, especially for owners that are away during
the daytime. Postnasal drip can be a cause of coughing
at night or when the animal is recumbent. In cats, cough
may be confused with retching or attempts to vomit
hairballs. Many small-breed dogs cough frequently and
owners may not interpret that as abnormal unless questioned. In this population of dogs, earlier management of
cough is more likely to be successful than after years of
unrelenting cough.
Kennel cough (or canine infectious respiratory disease
complex [CIRD]) is common in dogs, and even brief exposure to other apparently healthy dogs can result in infection. As always, questions about prior therapy and any
apparent benefit may help improve the diagnostic and
therapeutic options.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Pets that are presented for evaluation of cough should be
immediately assessed as ‘stable’ or ‘not stable’. Congestive
heart failure most commonly presents as tachypnea and/
or respiratory distress, but occasionally signs are misinterpreted to be only cough, particularly when large volumes of pulmonary edema are present. Tracheal collapse
may result in severe respiratory distress due to airflow
obstruction, although the initial signs may be cough. Other
‘not stable’ causes of cough include pneumonias and pleural space disease, such as spontaneous pneumothorax or
chronic pleural effusion. Unstable pets should be rapidly
administered supplemental oxygen and diagnostic testing
should be pursued at an efficient, yet unstressful, pace.
In stable patients, a complete physical examination
of the cardiopulmonary system is warranted, including
examination of the oral cavity, palpation of the neck for
masses or lymphadenopathy, auscultation of the upper
and lower airways and heart, and abdominal palpation.
Dogs with a visible expiratory ‘push’ commonly have
obstructive lower airway disease. Chronic bronchitis with

25/04/16 10:11 am

54

General approach

obstructive lower airways and asthma associated with
hypersensitivity lung disease are common examples of
this disorder. Pets should be evaluated for weight loss or
loss of muscle mass, which may accompany primary or
metastatic neoplasia, heart disease, or severe obstructive
pulmonary disease. Esophageal (megaesophagus) and
laryngeal dysfunction may lead to recurrent pneumonias
due to aspiration.
(See algorithm [Figure 2.8.1].)

DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
Thoracic imaging is recommended for evaluation of the
patient with cough. Chest radiographs are useful for
evaluation of lung parenchyma and airways, as well the
cardiac size and pleural space. CT may be used as well
for pulmonary diagnostics, and may provide additional
information about the airway and lung parenchyma.

COUGHING

What is the nature
of the cough?

At a minimum, dogs and cats with cough should have
chest radiographs performed for evaluation as to the possible cause, and to direct appropriate therapeutics.

SAMPLING
Airway sampling for collection of samples for cytology, aerobic culture and sensitivity testing, and/or PCR
testing should be considered in dogs and cats without
a clear diagnosis from the history, physical examination, and radiographs. Airway cytology can be obtained
with bronchoscopy, transtracheal wash, or endotracheal
tube passage and wash procedures. It is useful to document infection, inflammation, or eosinophilic infiltrates.
It is important to recall that the normal upper airway
structures are not sterile, and aerobic culture results
­
should always be interpreted in light of the cytological
findings.

Moist

Suggests alveolar involvement: allergic with fluid,
parasitic, pneumonia (aspiration – check
esophageal function), pulmonary edema, emboli

Dry

Suggests airway or interstitial disease: bronchitis,
tracheal collapse, neoplasia, laryngeal paralysis,
pharyngitis

Nonproductive

Early inflammatory/infectious disease, external
compression of airways, interstitial disease, left atrial
enlargement, lymphadenopathy/mediastinal mass,
bronchitis/tracheitis, nasopharyngeal disease

Productive

Inflammatory, infectious, and alveolar diseases

2.8.1

No
Hemoptysis

Yes

Foreign bodies, coagulopathy, neoplasia,
severe inflammation and paroxysmal coughing,
granuloma, pulmonary emboli

Nocturnal

Cardiac disease and pulmonary edema,
tracheal collapse

Daytime

Most other causes

Chronic

Progressive disease or recurrent triggers

Acute

Inhaled foreign body, allergic airway disease,
infectious tracheobronchitis

Figure 2.8.1 Diagnostic algorithm for cough.

K22463_C002.indd 54

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

MANAGEMENT
Treatment of cough is varied depending on the identified
underlying cause. The most common cause of chronic
cough in dogs is chronic bronchitis, and in cats it is feline
lower airway disease/asthma. If possible, specific therapy
is more likely to be useful than simple supportive care. If
no specifically treatable cause is found, supportive care
should be used. Lifestyle changes may help significantly
with cough; these include switching to a harness from a
collar, avoiding excessive excitement (and accompanying
barking), and avoiding indoor air pollutants such as cigarette smoke and perfumes. Additionally, contact with
dogs that may have infectious respiratory disease such as
kennel cough complex should be avoided.
Many dogs that cough are overweight or obese, and as
cough or exercise intolerance may limit activity, further
weight gain may occur. Meaningful improvements in
cough may occur with weight loss, and a weight loss plan
should be prescribed and carefully followed in affected
dogs.
Controlling inflammation is helpful in dogs with
chronic bronchitis, and is most often achieved through
oral or aerosolized glucocorticoids. Glucocorticoids
decrease airway inflammation, which subsequently
decreases cough. They are usually extremely effective
against cough, but may have side-effects such as weight
gain, panting, polyphagia, and polydipsia and polyuria,
which preclude long-term high dose use. Oral glucocorticoids may be tapered to the lowest dose that controls
signs. Inhaled glucocorticoids (e.g. fluticasone) are gaining in popularity for treatment of airway disease, and
may be very useful for long-term control.
While chronic bronchitis is not primarily an infectious
disease, treatment with antibiotics may be warranted
during exacerbations. In people with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, treatment with macrolides (e.g. azithromycin) reduces hospitalizations. The fluoroquinolones
and doxycycline are also useful. In most cases, duration
of treatment will range from 1 to 2 weeks, but frequent
recurring disease might require repeated antimicrobial
treatment.
Cough suppressants are also used for treatment of
chronic bronchitis. In general, the cough reflex is essential to help clear secretions or trapped foreign particles.
Chronic cough may be very tiring for both the dog and
the family. Antitussives may be divided into centrally
acting and locally acting substances. Centrally acting
drugs act at the cough center in the brain by depressing
the sensitivity of the cough centers to the various stimuli.

K22463_C002.indd 55

55

Opioids are effective centrally acting antitussives. They
may have additional properties such as sedation or constipation. In some animals, one opioid may be clearly
more effective than another. Thus, if significant coughing
is still occurring, it may be useful to try another medication or to increase the dose, as tolerance may develop
after prolonged usage. It is particularly helpful to give
the cough suppressant to the dog before bedtime, to help
both the pet owner and the pet sleep through the night.
Centrally acting cough suppressants used in veterinary
medicine include codeine, butorphanol, and hydrocodone. Tramadol may be helpful in some dogs, and has the
added benefit of being less expensive. Dextromethorphan
is available over the counter in many human cough medications, and is occasionally effective in dogs.
Recently, maropitant and gabapentin have been proposed for cough, although clinical trials have not been
performed. In people, gabapentin has been effective in
chronic cough.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Bexfield NH, Foale RD, Davison LJ et al. (2006) Management
of 13 cases of canine respiratory disease using inhaled
­corticosteroids. J Small Anim Pract 47:377–382.
Boyle TE, Hawkins EC, Davis JL et al. (2011) Failure of ­nebulized
irritant, acidic, or hypotonic solutions or external
­mechanical stimulation of the trachea to consistently
induce coughing in healthy, awake dogs. Can J Vet Res
75(3):228–232.
Ferasin L, Crews L, Biller DS et al. (2013) Risk factors for
­coughing in dogs with naturally acquired myxomatous
mitral valve disease. J Vet Intern Med 27(2):286–292.
Hawkins EC, Clay LD, Bradley JM (2010) Demographic and
historical findings, including exposure to environmental
tobacco smoke, in dogs with chronic cough. J Vet Intern Med
24(4):825–831.
Maggiore AD (2014) Tracheal and airway collapse in dogs. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 44(1):117–127.
McKiernan BC (2000) Diagnosis and treatment of canine chronic
bronchitis. Twenty years of experience. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 30(6):1267–1278.
Padrid P (2000) Feline asthma. Diagnosis and treatment. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30(6):1279–1293.
Peeters DE, McKiernan BC, Weisiger RM et al. (2000)
Quantitative bacterial cultures and cytological examination
of bronchoalveolar lavage specimens in dogs. J Vet Intern
Med 14(5):534–541.
Ryan NA, Birring SS, Gibson PG (2012) Gabapentin for ­refractory
chronic cough: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-­
controlled trial. Lancet 380:1583–1599.
Yamaya Y, Sugiya H, Watari T (2014) Tobacco exposure increased
airway limitation in dogs with chronic cough. Vet Rec
174(1):18.

25/04/16 10:11 am

This page intentionally left blank

57

Chapter 2

Common clinical problems

2.9 Epistaxis
Christine Iacovetta

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Epistaxis refers to hemorrhage originating from the nose.
The nose itself encompasses the external nasal planum,
the paired nasal cavities, and the paranasal sinuses.
Turbinate bones covered by mucosa fill a large portion
of the nasal cavities, whose main blood supply originates
from the maxillary branch of the external carotid artery.
The presence of vascular plexuses throughout the mucosa
provides a large blood supply that, when damaged, can
lead to significant bleeding. Venous blood exits the nose
via the dorsal nasal and sphenopalatine veins, eventually emptying into the external jugular vein. Hemorrhage
from the nose often occurs due to local destruction by
neoplastic, infectious, or inflammatory processes. In some
cases, traumatic events or inhalation of foreign material
may be the primary cause. Systemic infections or defects
in hemostasis are other potential causes of epistaxis. Less
commonly, hypertension or hyperviscosity syndromes
secondary to polycythemia, hyperlipidemia, hyperglobulinemia, or neoplasia occur (Tables 2.9.1, 2.9.2).

CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Epistaxis is readily visible (Figure 2.9.1) and often disturbing to owners; therefore, pets usually present with nasal
bleeding as a primary complaint. Occasionally, epistaxis

can be covert if blood only flows into the ­nasopharynx
and is subsequently swallowed or inhaled. A detailed history is important in determining the possible underlying
cause of the epistaxis and in some cases the breed of the
patient may also be helpful (e.g. Dobermanns and von
Willebrand deficiency) (Table 2.9.3). The owner should
be questioned as to the presence of any other type of discharge (e.g. purulent), if there is sneezing, hemoptysis,
hematemesis, hematuria, or hematochezia present, and
if the bleeding is acute or chronic. Sometimes, knowing
if the epistaxis is unilateral or bilateral is helpful in distinguishing intranasal versus systemic causes; however,
Table 2.9.2 Systemic infections leading to epistaxis in the dog
and cat.
Ehrlichia and Anaplasma spp.
Hepatozoonosis
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Feline leukemia virus
Feline immunodeficiency virus
Leishmaniasis
Leptospirosis
Septicemia
Heartworm disease
2.9.1

Table 2.9.1 Causes of epistaxis in the dog and cat.
Intranasal

Extranasal

Mycotic infection
Trauma
Foreign body
Oronasal fistula
Nasopharyngeal polyp
Dental abscess
Lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis
Eosinophilic rhinitis
Parasites: Pneumonyssoides
caninum
Viral: parainfluenza, ­adenovirus,
distemper

Thrombocytopenia
Thrombocytopathia
Coagulation factor
deficiency
Hypertension
Hyperviscosity
Systemic infection

K22463_C002.indd 57

Figure 2.9.1 The bilateral epistaxis in this dog was due to a
systemic coagulopathy.

25/04/16 10:11 am

58

General approach

Table 2.9.3 Clinical signs typically associated with intranasal
versus extranasal causes of epistaxis in the dog and cat.
Signs associated with intranasal
disease

Signs associated with
extranasal disease

Unilateral discharge
Ocular discharge
Decreased ocular retropulsion
Rubbing or pawing at face
Other types of nasal discharge
Violent sneezing
Pain
Depigmentation of the nose
Deformity of the palate

Bilateral discharge
Ecchymosis
Petechiation
Hematuria
Hematochezia
Systemic signs
(e.g. anorexia,
vomiting)

this is not always accurate. Obtaining a travel history will
help determine exposure to certain infectious diseases.
A history of running in tall grass or rooting in the ground
with or without pawing at the face may increase suspicion
for a foreign body. It is helpful to know if the owner has
noticed any changes in cognition or behavior at home.
Lastly, the general health of the pet should be considered
(e.g. appetite, vomiting) as well as any medications they
receive (e.g. tick preventives used, NSAIDs).

DIAGNOSIS
Epistaxis is a clinical sign and not a diagnosis; determination of the underlying etiology requires diagnostic
tests. The first step in any diagnostic plan should always
be a thorough physical examination. This should begin
with visually assessing facial symmetry, palpation of
the muzzle, and assessing for ocular retropulsion when
­evaluating a patient for nasal disease. These steps will
help determine if there is pain, deformities of bony structures, and exophthalmos, all of which are suggestive of a
highly destructive process. Placing a small piece of cotton
in front of each nostril can help determine airflow and
the extent of obstruction, as can looking to see if the animal has open-mouth breathing. The oral cavity should
be examined, in particular the dental arcade, for any discharge or evidence of periodontal disease, and both the
hard and soft palate should be assessed for any structural
changes. Neurologic function should be tested as changes
can alert the clinician to possible intracranial extension
of nasal disease. The patient should also be closely examined for any evidence of bleeding elsewhere, specifically
the epidermis, oral mucosa, pinnae, joints, retina, and
anterior chamber of the eye. A rectal examination for the
assessment of melena is recommended. Completion of a
good history and physical examination may or may not
give the clinician a suspicion of the underlying cause.

K22463_C002.indd 58

In cases of epistaxis, it is usually best to start with a coagulation assessment before doing further diagnostic tests
(Figure 2.9.2).

MANAGEMENT
As with any patient, the first step in treatment is stabilization. A patient with significant epistaxis may require
blood products to replace lost red cells as well as provide
clotting factors. Ideally, blood for coagulation testing
should be obtained prior to transfusion if time allows.
Occasionally, uncontrolled nasal hemorrhage may
occur that cannot be managed with transfusions alone.
Initially, intranasal applications of vasoconstrictor drugs
such as epinephrine or phenylephrine might temporarily
decrease the bleeding. If this is unsuccessful, the patient
should be anesthetized, endotracheally intubated, and
the nasal cavity packed with absorbent material to provide direct pressure (umbilical tape works well for this
purpose). Having suction equipment available to visualize the oropharynx for intubation is advised. Nasal packing material is left in place for 30 minutes prior to slowly
attempting unpacking. If there is no recurrence of bleeding, anesthesia can be stopped and the patient allowed to
wake up in a calm controlled manner.
Treatment of epistaxis is dependent on the underlying
cause and in a stable patient begins with discontinuation of any possible contributing medications (e.g. aspirin). Foreign bodies can often be removed nasally at the
time of discovery, nasal neoplasia may require surgery
and/or radiation, mycotic infections are ideally treated
with intranasal antifungal infusions, polyps may be
removed with traction, and rhinitis is treated medically
to reduce the inflammatory response. Most trauma cases
can just be monitored and treated supportively. Systemic
infections should be treated accordingly, hypertension
managed, and any coagulation disorders addressed.
Uncontrolled recurrent nasal bleeding can be managed
by carotid artery ligation or, in some cases, local vascular
embolization as salvage procedures. More specific therapies can be found in the relevant c­ hapter in this book
(Chapter 4, Respiratory disorders).

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Bissett SA, Drobatz KJ, McKnight A et al. (2007) Prevalence,
clinical features, and causes of epistaxis in dogs: 176 cases.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 231(12):1843–1850.
Weisse C, Nicholson ME, Rollings C et.al. (2004) Use of
­percutaneous arterial embolization for the treatment of
intractable epistaxis in three dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
224(8):1307–1311.

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

Epistaxis

59

2.9.2

History of
trauma

Blood pressure

May choose to
just monitor
Normal

Hypertensive

Platelet
count

Consider:
• CBC/Chemistry/UA
• Endocrine testing
• Abdominal ultrasound
• Thoracic radiographs
• Echocardiogram

Normal

Prothrombin time
Partial thromboplastin time
Activated clot time

Abnormal

Normal

Consider:
• Factor analysis
• Fibrinogen
• Fibrinogen degradation
products
• TEG

Complete blood count,
chemistry panel, and
urinalysis

Abnormal

Consider:
• von Willebrand testing
• BMBT
• Function testing
o TEG
o Sonoclot
o PFA 100
o Aggregometry

Normal

Abnormal

Consider:
• Tick titers if not already
done
• Heartworm testing
• FIV or FeLV testing in cats
• Nasal radiographs under
anesthesia
• CT or MRI
• Rhinoscopy
• Biopsy
• Nasal flush

Consider:
• Abdominal ultrasound
• Thoracic radiographs
• Other testing as indicated
by abnormality
• Echocardiography (in
cases of polycythemia)
• Intranasal imaging may
still be appropriate

Consider:
• Chemistry
• Tick titers
• Abdominal ultrasound
• Thoracic radiographs
• Other infectious
diseases (e.g.
leptospirosis)

Figure 2.9.2 Diagnostic algorithm for epistaxis. BMBT, buccal mucosal bleed time; UA, urinalysis; CBC, complete blood count; TEG,
thromboelastography; PFA 100, platelet function analyzer 100.

K22463_C002.indd 59

25/04/16 10:11 am

This page intentionally left blank

61

Chapter 2

Common clinical problems

2.10 Fever of unknown origin
Robert Armentano

INTRODUCTION
The classic definition of ‘fever of unknown origin’ (FUO)
provided for humans by Beeson and Petersdorf involves
an illness of at least 3 weeks’ duration, fever (continuous or fluctuating temperature of >104oF [40oC]), and
no established diagnosis after at least 1 week of hospital investigation. There is no accepted definition of this
term in veterinary medicine, except that the term FUO is
used to define any febrile animal patient for which there
is no obvious cause after ‘routine’ diagnostic tests have
been done. What constitutes ‘routine’ will vary amongst
different authors. The main diagnostic categories for
FUO include infections (local, systemic), neoplasms, and
immune-mediated diseases. Other less common causes
include: granulomatous diseases; noninfectious, inflammatory diseases such as pancreatitis, steatitis, and tissue
necrosis (ischemic insults); and drugs. It is only after a
search for the above causes that the clinician is left with
the diagnosis of FUO. Generally, the etiology of FUO is not
a rare disease but is rather a common disease presenting
in an atypical fashion.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Normal body temperature is regulated within a fairly
narrow range and is a balance between heat producing
and heat dissipating mechanisms of the body. Fever is an
increase of body temperature above the circadian variation as the result of a change in the thermoregulatory
center located in the hypothalamus. Substances that
cause fever are called pyrogens and may be either exogenous or endogenous. The majority of exogenous pyrogens
are microorganisms, their products, or toxins. Endotoxin
(lipopolysaccharide) is the best characterized exogenous
pyrogen, derived from the cell wall of gram-negative
and gram-positive bacteria. Exogenous pyrogens can
act directly on the brain to cause fever, but they act primarily by inducing the formation of endogenous products. These endogenous pyrogen-producing substances
include ­antigen–antibody complexes with complement,

K22463_C002.indd 61

complement cleavage p
­ roducts, steroid hormone metabolites, bile acids, and some cytokines.
The term ‘cytokine’ is used to describe the endogenous pyrogens that consist of several interleukins (IL),
cell-derived inflammatory polypeptides, and growth
­
promoting peptides. The major pyrogenic cytokines
include IL-1β, IL-1α, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, ­TNF-β,
­interferon α and IL-6. These cytokines circulate to the
anterior hypothalamus where prostaglandin E2 and
other arachidonic acid metabolites are produced. These in
turn induce the formation of secondary messengers such
as cyclic adenosine monophosphate, which cause the rise
in the thermoregulating set point leading to increased
heat conservation, heat production, and fever.

ETIOLOGY
The true incidence of FUO is unknown. A study by
Feldman noted the cause of FUO in dogs to be 40% infectious, 20% neoplastic, 20% immune-mediated disease,
10% miscellaneous disease, and 10% true FUO. A true FUO
is diagnosed as a fever in which the underlying etiology is never determined and that either spontaneously
resolves or responds to a combination of antibiotics and/
or steroids.
There are few retrospective papers documenting
FUO in dogs (Table 2.10.1). There are no large published
studies in cats but, anecdotally, infectious etiologies
are much more common than neoplastic and immune-­
mediated diseases. The conclusions from three recent retrospective reviews in dogs were that immune-mediated
was the most commonly diagnosed category of disease,
with immune-mediated polyarthritis as well as steroid-­
responsive meningitis–arteritis being the most common
diagnoses (Tables 2.10.1, 2.10.2). These studies also concluded that imaging (radiographs and ultrasound) and
cytology had the highest diagnostic yield.
In a recent paper describing the causes of FUO in
humans, the distribution of the causes was infectious
16%, neoplasia 7%, noninfectious inflammatory disease 22%, miscellaneous 4%, and no diagnosis 51%.

25/04/16 10:11 am

62

General approach

Table 2.10.1 Review of diagnoses in dogs with fever of unknown origin (FUO) (prevalence).
Retrospective study
Disease category

Dunn and Dunn (1998)

Battersby et al. (2006)

Chervier et al. (2012)

Immune mediated

22%

34.8%

48%

Bone marrow

22%

NA

NA

Infectious

16%

5.8%

18%

Neoplasia

9.5%

7.6%

6%

Miscellaneous

11.5%

9.1%

0%

True FUO

19%

22.7%

28%

Dunn KJ, Dunn JK (1998) Diagnostic investigation in 101 dogs with pyrexia of unknown origin. J Small Anim Pract 39(1):574–580.
Battersby IA, Murphy KF, Tasker S et al. (2006) Retrospective study of fever in dogs: laboratory testing, diagnoses and influence of
prior treatment. J Small Anim Pract 47(7):370–376.
Chervier C, Chabanne L, Godde M et al. (2012) Causes, diagnostic signs, and the utility of investigations of fever in dogs: 50 cases.
Can Vet J 53(5):525–530.

Table 2.10.2 Common differential diagnoses (not all inclusive) and common tests available.
Category

Disease

Dog

Cat

Tests available

Infectious
endocarditis

X

Meningitis

X

X

Cerebrospinal fluid tap for cytology, cultures

Bacteremia

X

X

CBC, blood culture

Pyelonephritis

X

X

Urine culture, AUS, pyelocentesis

Cholangitis/
cholecystitis

X

X

Serum liver enzymes, ultrasound, cholecystocentesis, liver biopsy

Pyothorax

X

X

TXR, thoracentesis, culture

Peritonitis

X

X

AUS, abdominocentesis, culture, glucose/lactate blood:fluid
comparison

Discospondylitis

X

X

Radiographs, CT/MRI, FNA

Infectious arthritis

X

X

Joint tap for cytology and culture

Leptospirosis

X

MAT serology, urine PCR

Borreliosis

X

4DX, C6 antibody

Brucellosis

X

Serology

Mycobacteriosis

X

X

Culture, PCR

Bartonellosis

X

X

Serology, PCR, BAPGM culture/PCR

Infectious disease
Bacterial
Systemic

Localized

Specific

Echocardiogram, blood cultures

(Continued)

K22463_C002.indd 62

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

Category

Disease

Dog

Cat

Tests available

X

Serology, cytology, IFA

X

Culture, PCR

Feline leukemia

X

Serology(antigen), IFA

Feline infectious
peritonitis

X

Histopathology, IFA of macrophages, cytology, Rivalta test

Feline
immunodeficiency
virus

X

Serology (antibody)

Calicivirus

X

PCR

Plague
Mycoplasmosis
Viral

Vector-borne

Fungal

Protozoal

63

X

Distemper

X

IFA, serology

Ehrlichiosis

X

Anaplasmosis

X

Serology, PCR

Rocky Mountain
spotted fever

X

Serology, PCR

Hemotropic
mycoplasmosis

X

X

PCR, blood smear

Blastomycosis

X

X

Urine antigen, cytology/histopathology

Cryptococcosis

X

X

Serology (latex agglutination)

Coccidioidomycosis

X

X

Serology

Histoplasmosis

X

X

Urine antigen, cytology/histopathology

Aspergillosis (other)

X

Toxoplasmosis

X

Neosporosis

X

Hepatozoonosis

X

X

PCR, histopathology

Babesiosis

X

X

PCR

Leishmaniasis

X

X

Serology, cytology, PCR

Systemic lupus
erythematosus

X

Immune-mediated
polyarthritis

X

Steroid-responsive
meningitis

X

Vasculitis

X

Immune-mediated
neutropenia

X

X

Serology, PCR, blood smear

Cytology/histopathology, fungal culture, PCR, galactomannan
serology
X

Serology (IgG/IgM), histopathology
Serology, histopathology, PCR

Immune/
inflammatory
Immune
mediated

Cytology/histopathology, ANA
X

Cytology, rheumatoid factor
CSF cytology

X

Histopathology
CBC, bone marrow cytology/histopathology
(Continued)

K22463_C002.indd 63

25/04/16 10:11 am

64

General approach

Table 2.10.2 Common differential diagnoses (not all inclusive) and common tests available. (Continued)
Category

Disease

Dog

Cat

Tests available

Inflammatory

Nodular panniculitis

X

X

Histopathology

Lymphadenitis

X

X

Histopathology

Steatitis

X

Pancreatitis

X

X

AUS, PLI, histopathology

Granulomatous

X

X

Cytology, histopathology

Hypereosinophilic

X

X

Histopathology, CBC

Solid tumors

Any, hepatic, GI,
pulmonary

X

X

TXR, AXR, AUS, cytology, histopathology

Hematopoietic

Lymphoma

X

X

TXR, AXR, AUS, cytology, histopathology, PARR, flow cytometry

Leukemia

X

X

CBC, bone marrow cytology, flow cytometry

Myeloma

X

X

Globulin, radiographs, Bence-Jones proteinuria, bone marrow
cytology

Malignant
histiocytosis

X

X

Histopathology

Portosystemic
shunt

X

X

Chemistry, bile acids, AUS, abdominal CT, nuclear scintigraphy

Drug reaction

X

X

Eliminate medications

Amyloidosis

X

X

Histopathology

Histopathology

Neoplasia

Miscellaneous

TXR, thoracic radiography; AXR, abdominal radiography; AUS, abdominal ultrasound; MAT, microscopic agglutination test; FNA,
fine-needle aspiration; BAPGM, Bartonella alpha Proteobacteria Gowth Medium; IFA, immunofluorescent antibody; PARR; PCR for
antigenic rearrangement; ANA, antinuclear antibody; PLI, pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity.

The paper compared the causes in 2013 with those
listed in 1961, which was infectious 36%, neoplastic 19%,
­noninfectious inflammatory 17%, miscellaneous 19%, no
­diagnosis 9%.
Infections should always be considered first in the
search for the etiology of FUO because of their frequency
and potential response to treatment. It is helpful to categorize infections as either localized or systemic in order
to allow for an eventual well-focused approach to the
patient’s problem. In the cat, viral agents such as parvovirus, herpesvirus, or calicivirus usually cause fairly classical clinical signs and rarely persist long enough to fit the
definition of true FUO. Feline infectious peritonitis coronavirus infection is a common cause of FUO because it
produces insidious, chronic illness and frequently defies
easy diagnosis. Fever is often associated with retroviral
infections (FeLV, FIV) as a direct result of the virus infection, but more often due to an opportunistic infection

K22463_C002.indd 64

occurring secondary to the immunosuppressive effects of
the viral disease.
For bacterial and fungal infections in the dog and cat
that are easy to recognize, treatment success will vary
according to a whole host of factors such as age, underlying organ dysfunction, immune status, and type of
organism. Localized bacterial infections in an occult
location (e.g. metritis, low-grade pleuritis, osteomyelitis,
tooth root abscess) or those caused by fastidious organisms that are not sensitive to treatment with commonly
prescribed antimicrobial agents (e.g. Mycobacterium,
Nocardia, Mycoplasma, L-form bacteria) are the most
likely to cause persistent fever in the infectious category.
Systemic mycotic diseases (e.g. histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, ­
coccidioidomycosis) cause fever unresponsive
to antibiotics and should be included in the differential
list for patients residing in or having traveled through
regions endemic for these agents. Cryptococcus neoformans

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

rarely produces a febrile response unless infection is generalized or involves the CNS. Infections with Mycoplasma
haemofelis (Haemobartonella felis), Toxoplasma gondii,
aberrant helminth migration, and pulmonary embolization by Dirofilaria immitis may also cause fever.
The urinary and pulmonary systems must be thoroughly assessed in any patient with a fever that cannot be localized on physical examination, and this
especially applies to acquired infections in patients
that are hospitalized for more than 7 days. All too often,
these are the sites of origin for disseminated infection.
Other disorders, such as infective endocarditis and localized abdominal abscesses, might be difficult to diagnose
without the aid provided by imaging techniques such as
ultrasound, CT, and MRI. Only after the site of the infection is localized can a definitive therapeutic plan be
devised.
Neoplasia is a fairly common cause of fever. FeLVrelated cancers (e.g. lymphoma, myeloproliferative
­disease) in cats are the most common cause of fever in
this particular disease class. The fever can be a paraneoplastic syndrome associated with the tumor itself, or it
can be due to secondary complications from the cancer
such as infections occurring as a result of myelophthisic
disease. Solid tumors such as pulmonary adenocarcinoma can also cause fever as the result of the host’s
immune response to the tumor, damage to adjacent tissue
from the expanding tumor mass, or because of avascular
tumor necrosis.
As mentioned earlier, noninfectious inflammatory
diseases, including immune-mediated diseases, are not
so rare. Some immunologic diseases, such as IMHA, the
pemphigus family of dermatoses, and systemic lupus
erythematosus, can be readily identified. Others such as
the polyarthropathies, sterile meningitis, and polymyositis are other examples of immune-mediated inflammatory disease.
There are many other causes of noninfectious inflammatory fevers. In the dog and cat these include noninfectious inflammatory diseases such as cholangiohepatitis,
inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatitis, and pansteatitis. Drug-associated fever is most common with tetracycline but has also been reported with sulfonamides,
penicillins, quinidine, novobiocin, nitrofurantoin,
amphotericin B, barbiturates, iodine, propylthiouracil,
atropine, cimetidine, salicylates, prednisone, antihistamines, and procainamide. Metabolic and endocrine diseases, including hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma,
hyperlipemia, and hypernatremia, and primary neurologic diseases causing CNS inflammation or impinging

K22463_C002.indd 65

65

on the hypothalamic thermoregulatory center may occasionally cause fever. This information is summarized in
Table 2.10.2.

DIAGNOSIS
The key to obtaining a diagnosis includes a systematic approach for the work up of FUO in both dogs and
cats. The most important steps prior to implementing a
diagnostic plan include a thorough history and physical
examination. The physical examination should include
orthopedic, neurologic, funduscopic (Figure 2.10.1), and
rectal examinations. A staged diagnostic approach should
be implemented in patients with vague clinical signs and
no definitive lesion identified (Table 2.10.3).
Stage one testing includes the history and physical
examination as well as screening laboratory testing.
Routine tests should include a serum chemistry panel,
CBC with pathologist review, and a complete urinalysis.
Screening infectious disease testing such as a 4DX in dogs
(heartworm, Lyme, Anaplasma, and Erhlichia ELISA Snap
test) and FeLV/FIV testing in cats should also be done.
Evaluation of blood cells microscopically may assist in
the diagnosis of hemoparasites, as well as a review of
white cells for cytotoxicity. If the physical examination
findings indicate a body cavity lesion, such as lung crackles, or long bone pain, radiographs should be included in
stage one testing. Occasionally, there is enough d
­ iagnostic

2.10.1

Figure 2.10.1 Fundic examination lesion in a cat with
Cryptococcus spp. infection. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 10:11 am

66

General approach

Table 2.10.3 Systematic diagnostic approach for fever of
unknown origin.
Stage

Recommended testing

1

History, physical examination
Screening blood testing
CBC, chemistry, urinalysis
Infectious disease screening:
•• ‘4DX’ (heartworm, Lyme, Anaplasma, Ehrlichia)
•• FeLV/FIV
+/- Thoracic radiographs
+/- Abdominal ultrasound

2

Chest, abdominal, skeletal radiographs
Tissue/fluid cultures (urine, blood)
Urine, blood
Urine protein:creatinine
Serum bile acids
Infectious disease testing
Vector-borne disease serology/PCR
+/- Immune testing (ANA, RF)
Abdominal ultrasound
+/- Echocardiography

3

Arthrocentesis
Bone marrow cytology/biopsy
Advanced imaging (e.g. CT, MRI)
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis
Bronchoscopy
Laparoscopy
Thoracoscopy
Exploratory laparotomy

­information from stage one to start treatment as indicated below.
Stage two testing would consist of additional imaging
tests and further diagnostic sampling. Imaging should
consist of thoracic and abdominal radiography if they
were not done in the stage one evaluation. Cytology samples will often have the highest diagnostic yield if a lesion
is identified. Further diagnostic imaging is also helpful
and often includes abdominal ultrasonography and,
potentially, echocardiography, particularly if a new heart
murmur is auscultated.
Infectious disease testing is a key component to the
diagnostic work up. Specific tests should be selected
based on the clinician’s differential diagnoses, patient
signalment, duration of clinical signs, and geographic
locale. Bacterial culture and sensitivity testing should
be done on urine, specific abnormal tissues, and blood
if sepsis is suspected. Blood cultures, if indicated, should

K22463_C002.indd 66

2.10.2

Figure 2.10.2 Blood culture vials. To maximize culture utility,
a large sample volume is recommended (16–20 ml in large
dogs, 5 ml in small dogs and cats), as well as using vials with
antibiotic binding beads and aerobic and anaerobic culture
media. Sterile collection is required, ideally at 2–3 venous
(+/- one arterial) sites.

be performed early in the diagnostic phase since it often
takes days for results to become available (Figure 2.10.2).
Stage three diagnostic testing includes advanced
imaging or more invasive tissue sampling techniques.
Testing is chosen based on prior test results and physical examination findings or to begin searching for more
unusual causes of FUO. These tests include arthrocentesis, echocardiography, and bone marrow analysis even if
a lesion is not identified (no apparent murmur, normal
CBC, no joint effusion), as diseases in these locations can
remain sequestered and asymptomatic early in the disease process.

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

MANAGEMENT
Medications used for empiric treatment of the febrile
patient often include antibiotics and/or antipyretics.
Broad-spectrum antimicrobials are targeted against a
multitude of different bacterial agents or, more specifically, toward vector-borne disease. Doxycycline or azithromycin are often used in cases of the latter etiology.
Antipyretics should not be used in the acute phase of
disease unless temperatures exceed 106°F (41.1oC). Antiinflammatory medications will often mask the underlying disease and can compromise the patient. NSAID
side-effects such as GI ulceration, as well as hepatic
and renal damage, must be considered when prescribing these medications in debilitated and dehydrated
patients. If the patient’s body temperature exceeds 106°F
(41.1oC), IV fluid therapy should be administered. NSAID
therapy may be considered if the risks of adverse reactions are minimal. External cooling, such as fans, is not
recommended, as this will only combat the thermoregulatory mechanisms, causing compensatory shivering

K22463_C002.indd 67

67

to maintain the hypothalamic set point. Depending on
the status of the patient, it is often appropriate to forgo
an empiric medication trial and pursue staged diagnostic testing as noted in order to identify the underlying
­etiology. Steroids, and other immunosuppressive medications, are frequently used but only if an autoimmune
disease is diagnosed and/or infectious disease has been
deemed highly unlikely. The prognosis for FUO is dependent on the underlying etiology and the ability to implement an early and appropriate treatment plan.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Flood J (2009) The diagnostic approach to fever of unknown
origin in dogs. Compend Contin Educ Vet 31(1):14–20.
Horowitz HW (2013) Fever of unknown origin or fever of too
many origins. N Eng J Med 368:197–199.
Lunn KF (2012) Fever. In: Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat,
4th edn. (ed. CE Green) Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 1115–1123.
Miller JB (2010) Hyperthermia and fever of unknown origin.
In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edn. (eds.
SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman) Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 41–45.

25/04/16 10:11 am

This page intentionally left blank

69

Chapter 2

Common clinical problems

2.11 Dysuria
Isabelle Cattin

INTRODUCTION
Dysuria is defined as difficulty urinating. It is often
combined with pain during urination, although this is
not always the case. Other urination abnormalities can
be seen with dysuria, such as pollakiuria (frequent urination), stranguria (extreme difficulty in passing urine
[Figure 2.11.1]), and the presence of hematuria (blood in
the urine [Figure 2.11.2]). Dogs and cats with dysuria are
at risk for developing potentially life-threatening complications associated with urinary obstruction and inability
to urinate. Therefore, a thorough and timely evaluation
of the patient is essential.

EVALUATION OF THE PATIENT WITH
DYSURIA

should be taken, including duration of clinical signs
and general health of the patient, and description of the
urination pattern including appearance of the urine.
Pigmenturia such as bilirubinuria or hemoglobinuria
will signal other disorders elsewhere in the body and
the pattern of urination can help localize a urinary tract
disorder, where stranguria reflects pathology involving
the lower urinary tract. Drugs and concurrent diseases
that could potentially make the animal more susceptible
to urinary disorders should be ruled out. The evaluation
of the urination pattern includes voiding frequency and
urine volume, ability to pass urine (normal stream versus dripping), pain, urination in inappropriate places, as
2.11.2

The initial evaluation of a dog or cat presented with
dysuria should include signalment, a thorough history,
and a physical examination (Figure 2.11.3). A detailed
signalment can be helpful as some conditions associated with dysuria might be seen more readily at a certain age or in specific breeds. For example, cystitis occurs
commonly in both adult and young animals, whereas a
neoplastic process will be higher on the list of differential diagnoses in a geriatric patient. A complete history
2.11.1

Figures 2.11.1 Cat with stranguria and hematuria associated
with urethral obstruction and cystitis. (Courtesy M. Schaer).

K22463_C002.indd 69

Figure 2.11.2 Hematuria in a sample taken from a dog with an
atonic bladder and secondary E. coli cystitis. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 10:11 am

70

General approach

DYSURIA

2.11.3

Abnormal
urine sediment?

YES

NO
Bladder size

Inflammatory cells

Other cells

Positive urine
culture?

YES
Infection
Treat if first time
and no systemic
signs
Look for concurrent
disease such as
obstruction if
recurrence or
systemic signs

Neoplasia
Inflammation/trauma
(epithelial cells,
RBCs)

Large

Normal/small

No
Idiopathic cystitis
Urolithiasis
Urethritis/prostatitis/
vaginitis

Tonic/difficult
to express?

Flaccid/easy
to express?

Obstruction
(bladder or urethra)
Neurogenic
(upper motor neuron;
dyssynergia)

Neurogenic
(overflow
bladder)

Obstruction (partial)
Neurogenic
(dyssynergia)
Bladder
rupture/urethral tear

Figure 2.11.3 Algorithm for the clinical approach to dysuric dogs and cats.

well as passing discolored/bloody urine. The presence
of systemic signs should also be assessed, as they may
reveal the existence of an underlying disease that needs
to be addressed and the need for urgent care. While discussing clinical signs, care should be taken to differentiate dyschezia and tenesmus from straining to urinate,
especially with feline patients, in order to avoid misdiagnosing a urinary obstruction. Physical examination
should encompass a routine examination and temperature taking. The clinician should then especially focus
on palpation of the urinary bladder to assess the following aspects: size, shape, and tonicity of the bladder wall.
These simple elements will be very helpful in the initial
assessment of the ongoing process. For example, a large,
tonic, painful bladder in a cat suggests acute urethral
blockage, whereas a large, flaccid (and easy to express)
bladder might rather point toward a neurologic problem.
The presence of vaginal/preputial discharge should be
assessed as well. An attempt to pass a urinary catheter
with caution in male dogs can help confirm the presence
and severity of a urethral obstruction.

K22463_C002.indd 70

ETIOLOGY
Causes of dysuria can be divided into several categories:
inflammatory/infectious, obstructive, neurogenic, and
traumatic. The first two are the most prevalent in dogs
and cats. These categories can be further separated into
various conditions, which are discussed below.

Inflammatory/infectious causes
Bacterial or, less commonly, fungal urinary tract infections can be seen in both cats and dogs and will commonly
result in dysuria and pollakiuria. Urinalysis and a urine
culture are necessary to confirm the presence of infection
and select an appropriate treatment. In intact male dogs,
prostatic infections (prostatitis, prostatic abscess) should
be ruled out. In less common instances, congenital malformations (e.g. remnant urachus) can be the cause for
recurrent/persistent urinary infections. While inflammation is frequently found in correlation with an ongoing infectious process, noninfectious, inflammatory
conditions can occur in various locations of the urinary

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

71

2.11.4

or genital tract, and result in dysuria. Cystitis, urethritis, and vaginitis can occur without a concurrent infectious cause. ‘Idiopathic’ (or interstitial) cystitis is a very
common disease in cats, and has a multi-factorial origin.
Behavioral issues play an important role in the etiology of feline idiopathic cystitis, and a thorough history
should be collected from all cases with suggestive clinical
signs. Inflammatory (granulomatous) urethritis is a proliferative disease seen mostly in female dogs.

Obstructive causes
Obstructive processes in any area of the lower urinary
tract can result in dysuria, stranguria, or even inability to pass any urine. Intraluminal obstructions can be
caused by urolithiasis, urethral blood/mucus plugs, urethral strictures, or neoplastic processes. While dysuria
can result from discomfort associated with bladder wall
inflammation secondary to urinary bladder stones, urethral obstruction should always be ruled out because it
requires immediate care. In cats, blood clots or mucus
plugs are a frequent cause of urethral obstruction
(Figure 2.11.4). Urethral strictures can occur with severe
urethritis or secondary to local trauma such as occurs with
urethral stones, traumatic catheterization, or urethral
surgery. Neoplastic processes in the urinary bladder or
the urethra can cause dysuria secondary to inflammation
or be due to partial or complete obstruction. This should
be considered especially in older animals, but can occur
at any age. Extraluminal obstructions of the urethra can
commonly be seen with prostatomegaly in conditions
such as prostatitis, prostatic abscess (Figures 2.11.5a, b),
prostatic cyst, or prostatic neoplasia. Benign prostatic
hyperplasia rarely causes urinary outflow obstruction
in dogs and cats because of anatomic differences and
the failure of hyperplastic tissue to invade the urethra.
Extraurinary masses impinging on the urinary tract are
less common causes of extraluminal obstruction.

Figure 2.11.4 A large mucocrystalline plug digitally removed
from a male cat with urethral obstruction. (Courtesy M. Schaer)
2.11.5

a

Neurogenic causes
Upper or lower motor neuron diseases can cause either
a loss of ability to contract the bladder or an increased
spasticity of the external urethral sphincter, both resulting in difficulty urinating. A full neurologic examination
and palpation of the urinary bladder are important steps
in evaluating neurologic causes of dysuria. Increased
urethral sphincter tone can cause a dynamic obstruction
with inability to pass urine, while a decreased ­bladder
tone can result in pollakiuria or even incontinence
­(‘overflow bladder’). In animals e­ xperiencing prolonged
difficulty in emptying the bladder secondary to urethral
obstruction, neurogenic dysuria can occur as a result of

K22463_C002.indd 71

b
Figures 2.11.5a, b A lateral radiograph (a) and an ultrasound
image (b) of a dog with a prostatic abscess. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 10:11 am

72

General approach

the ­chronically distended urinary bladder (Figure 2.11.6).
The damage caused to the muscles and nerves of the
­urinary bladder can be irreversible if the problem is not
promptly recognized and the obstruction not relieved in
a timely manner. Reflex dyssynergia is a condition seen
in large breed dogs that results from inadequate coordination between the detrusor muscle in the bladder and
urethral sphincter musculature. The urethral muscle fails
to relax when the bladder contracts, thus impairing the
ability to urinate.

2.11.6

Traumatic causes
Tears or rupture of the urinary bladder or urethra may
occur following trauma and lead to dysuria. Causes
include road traffic accidents, gunshots, blunt abdominal
trauma, iatrogenic rupture by palpation or instrumentation (Figure 2.11.7), or urinary calculi (Figure 2.11.8).

FURTHER INVESTIGATIONS

Figure 2.11.6 This plain radiograph shows emphysematous
cystitis in a dog with an atonic urinary bladder from a
lumbosacral intervertebral stenosis. Note the similarity to a
pneumocystogram, but no such procedure was done in this
patient. (Courtesy M. Schaer)
2.11.7

Diagnostic tests are generally necessary to make a precise diagnosis. Laboratory tests and diagnostic imaging
can be very helpful in patients with dysuria. However,
some more specialized methods, such as endoscopy or
cystometry/urethral pressure profile, might be of benefit
in specific cases, thus requiring referral to a specialist.

Laboratory testing
Urinalysis and urine culture are helpful to rule out urinary tract infections or inflammation. Urinalysis should
include urine SG and cytologic analysis of the urine sediment. Cystocentesis is the preferred method to sample
urine for culture and sensitivity. Catheter samples are
adequate as well. Voided samples may be contaminated
by cells and bacteria from the lower genital tract (vagina,
prepuce). Sediment analysis may reveal the presence
of red and/or white blood cells, crystals, infectious
organisms, parasite ova (Capillaria [Pearsonema] spp.,
Schistosoma spp.), and neoplastic cells (Figure 2.11.9). It
is helpful to remember that the absence of crystals does
not rule out the presence of uroliths and that the presence of crystals does not imply the presence of calculi.
Additionally, different types of uroliths and urinary crystals can be present together in the urinary tract.
A urine culture should be performed to document an
infection and assist in the choice of appropriate antibiotic
treatment. The urine sediment of immunosuppressed
animals may not show any signs of inflammation,

K22463_C002.indd 72

Figure 2.11.7 Cystogram showing a ruptured urinary bladder
caused by excessive palpation. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

therefore a urine culture should always be performed in
immunosuppressed patients. Blood chemistry analysis
can help detect kidney disease or life-threatening electrolyte imbalances, for example in the case of complete urethral obstruction. A CBC can be helpful in documenting a
­systemic inflammatory response (e.g. pyelonephritis) or
anemia in patients with chronic or significant hematuria.
In male dogs with an abnormal prostate, cytologic analysis of an ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy
of the prostate can help document the nature of prostatic
changes.

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

2.11.8

73

2.11.10

Figure 2.11.8 Lateral radiograph showing a large bladder
calculus in the peritoneal space resulting from a spontaneous
rupture of the bladder. This dog was systemically sick as a
result of the uroperitoneum. She recovered well with surgery.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)
2.11.9

Figure 2.11.10 A plain lateral abdominal radiograph showing
emphysematous cystitis in a dog with diabetes mellitus and
glycosuria. The air in the bladder mucosa is caused by bacterial
fermentation of the glucose. (Courtesy M. Schaer)
2.11.11

Figure 2.11.9 Cytology sample (obtained by ‘urethral massage’)
from a dog with transitional cell carcinoma, showing many
typical neoplastic round cells.

Imaging
Radiography (survey films, studies with contrast agents)
and ultrasonography are very useful assets to diagnose
causes of dysuria (Figure 2.11.10).
Radiography is helpful to evaluate the size and position of the urinary bladder and can document the presence of uroliths, although not all types of uroliths are
radiopaque. Extraurinary structures can be assessed, such
as the prostate, sublumbar lymph nodes, and bony structures (pelvis, spine). Radiography can also provide evidence of any vertebral abnormality that might represent
a neurologic cause of the urinary problem (diskospondylitis, lumbosacral stenosis (Figure 2.11.6), intervertebral
disks, and other forms of pathology such as spinal neoplasia [Figure 2.11.11]). Radiographic contrast studies
(double contrast cystogram, retrograde urethrogram)

K22463_C002.indd 73

Figure 2.11.11 A lateral dorsal caudal abdominal radiograph
of a dog with prostatic carcinoma and lumbar metastases as
evidenced by the proliferation of bone on the ventral vertebral
bodies of L4 to L7. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

can provide further help in identifying causes of urinary
obstruction that cannot readily be seen on survey films,
such as radiolucent stones, narrowing of the urethral
lumen (as in urethral strictures or spasms), or mucosal
abnormalities (inflammation) in the urinary bladder or
urethra (Figures 2.11.12, 2.11.13). The appropriate use of
contrast agents can also help document abnormalities of
the bladder mucosa (inflammation, masses) or the presence of urinary leakage.
Ultrasonography is mostly helpful to evaluate the
urinary bladder (mucosa, presence of stones, or masses

25/04/16 10:11 am

74

General approach

2.11.14

2.11.12

Figure 2.11.12 A double contrast cystogram in a cat with a
transitional cell carcinoma in the urinary bladder that caused a
radiographic filling defect. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

a

2.11.13

Figure 2.11.13 Cystogram of a dog with transitional cell
carcinoma of the urinary bladder showing mucosal filling
defects caused by the tumor and a uroperitoneum caused
by spontaneous rupture of the weakened wall of the urinary
bladder. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

[Figures 2.11.14a, b]), the prostate, and the surrounding
organs (kidneys, lymph nodes). Evaluation of the urethra
is more difficult due to the intrapelvic location and limited visibility, although an experienced ultrasonographer
can easily identify many forms of urethral pathology
(Figure 2.11.15).

Other diagnostic methods
Urethroscopy and cystoscopy allow direct visualization of the urinary tract mucosa. Endoscopy can be a
very useful diagnostic tool for confirming urethral
strictures and mucosal abnormalities (Figure 2.11.16).
Additionally, it allows the operator to collect mucosal
biopsies in order to differentiate inflammatory from

K22463_C002.indd 74

b
Figures 2.11.14a, b (a) Ultrasound image of a cat with E. coli
cystitis that caused urinary bladder mucosal thickening that
resembled that caused by bladder neoplasia. The fine-needle
aspirate cytology showed only neutrophils and bacteria.
(b) The same cat 2 weeks later after antibiotic treatment
showing regression of the thickened bladder mucosa.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

neoplastic processes. Furthermore, successful endoscopic removal of bladder stones using lithotripsy has
been reported.
Cystometry and urethral pressure profilometry are
specialized techniques used to assess the function of
the urinary bladder and urethral muscles in cases
of s­uspected neurogenic dysuria (for example reflex
­dyssynergia); these are best done by individuals well
trained with the appropriate instrumentation required.
A review of the indications for the different diagnostic
tests used in dysuria is shown in Table 2.11.1.

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

2.11.15

Figure 2.11.15 Ultrasound image of a dog with prostatic
carcinoma showing urethral pathology caused by tumor
invasion. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

75

2.11.16

Figure 2.11.16 Cystoscopic view of a urethral foreign body.
(Courtesy University of Florida Small Animal Internal Medicine
Service)

Table 2.11.1 Clinical usefulness of various tests in dysuric cats and dogs.
Test

Indication/suspected process

Advantages

Disadvantages

Urinalysis

Any case of dysuria

Fast and cheap
Can be helpful to document
infection, crystalluria, possibly
neoplasia

Non-specific
Some causes can be missed (neoplasia, urolithiasis)

Urine culture
(usually aerobic)

Abnormal urinalysis
Recurrent signs
Underlying disease with risk of
‘silent’ infection
Evaluation of treatment
success

Readily available
Reasonable cost
Allows targeted treatment

Delayed results (48–72 hours)
Does not always ­preclude ­further
testing (an ­infection can be secondary to other causes)

Radiography
(plain)

Urolithiasis
Extraurinary diseases
Posterior abdominal ­extraluminal
masses

Readily available
Easily performed
Evaluation of ­extraurinary/bony
structures

Radiolucent uroliths not seen
Mucosal abnormalities rarely
visible

Radiography (with
contrast)

Mucosal abnormalities
Urolithiasis
Urethral disease

Minimally invasive
Allows evaluation of ­urethral
content/mucosa

Requires technical skills
Sedation or anesthesia ­usually
necessary

Ultrasound

Urolithiasis
Bladder wall abnormalities
Extraurinary diseases
Diseases of the proximal urethra

Frequently available
Excellent image of ­bladder
mucosa
Allows sampling
Can show all types of uroliths

Requires technical skills
Urethra cannot be fully viewed

Endoscopy

Urethral disease
Urolithiasis
Bladder wall abnormalities

Allows direct visualization of
mucosa
Allows sampling
Therapeutic in some cases
(urolithiasis, polyps)

Only available in limited facilities
Needs experienced operator
Anesthesia necessary
Increased cost

K22463_C002.indd 75

25/04/16 10:11 am

76

General approach

SUMMARY

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING

A systematic stepwise approach to dysuria cases is
­necessary to localize the problem, as well as to assess
the urgency of the care needed. Dysuria may lead to
potentially serious complications and dysuric dogs
and cats should always be evaluated without delay.
History taking and a complete physical examination are essential to localize the origin of the problem.
Knowledge of the different diseases and their clinical
expression helps in choosing further diagnostic steps
and ­identifying ­underlying diseases. Treatment recommendations for the different conditions mentioned in
this chapter are ­discussed in Chapter 12 (Nephrology/
urology).

Adams LG, Syme HM (2010) Canine ureteral and lower urinary
tract diseases. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
7th edn. (eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman) Saunders Elsevier,
St. Louis, pp. 2086–2115.
Labato MA, Acierno MJ (2010) Micturition disorders and urinary
incontinence. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
7th edn. (eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman) Saunders Elsevier,
St. Louis, pp. 160–164.
Lane IF (2009) Urinary diseases. In: Kirk’s Current Veterinary
Therapy XIV. (eds. JD Bonagura, DC Twedt) Saunders Elsevier,
St. Louis, pp. 844–971.
Westropp JL, Buffington CAT (2010) Lower urinary tract
­disorders in cats. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
7th edn. (eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman) Saunders Elsevier,
St. Louis, pp. 2069–2086.

K22463_C002.indd 76

25/04/16 10:11 am

77

Chapter 2

Common clinical problems

2.12 Pallor
Elisa M. Mazzaferro

INTRODUCTION
Pallor is defined as an extreme or unnatural paleness of
the skin. Pallor can be caused by anemia, peripheral vasoconstriction, hemorrhage, stress, or death. In humans,
pallor is most readily observed in the skin and mucous
membranes. In animals with fur and pigmented mucous
membranes, pallor may be less easily identified. In general, pallor is a subjective visual index of tissue perfusion
and oxygen delivery to the skin and mucous membranes,
including the conjunctiva.

ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A clinician’s index of suspicion as to the cause of a clinical
problem, including pallor, starts with a thorough patient
signalment and history. Could an animal have ingested

any toxins, including a vitamin K antagonist rodenticide,
or zinc-containing objects including USA pennies minted
after 1982? Is there a potential history of trauma? Is there
a travel history outside of the patient’s normal location?
Have there been recent vaccinations or medications
including over-the-counter or homeopathic remedies?
Has there been a change in appetite, vomiting, diarrhea,
weight loss, or apparent weight gain? Has there been a
change in the color of the feces or the urine? Has there
been any coughing, hemoptysis, or gingival or other
bleeding? Do the clients use flea and tick preventatives?
Oxygen delivery is a function of cardiac output,
peripheral vascular resistance, and arterial oxygen content (Figure 2.12.1). Cardiac output is a function of the
heart rate and the stroke volume. The latter involves the
cardiac preload (the amount of blood that is delivered

Pallor

2.12.1

Oxygen delivery

Systemic vascular
resistance

Cardiac output

Cardiogenic

Noncardiogenic

Contractility

Primary cardiac
disease
Sepsis

Preload

Afterload

Hypothermia
Vasoconstriction

Hypovolemia

Obstructive

Severe
dehydration

Pericardial
effusion

Hemorrhage

GDV

Arterial oxygen
content

[Hb]

PaO2

Anemia

Pulmonary
Metabolic

SaO2

Pulmonary
Cardiac

Blood loss
Ineffective
production

Regenerative

Nonregenerative

Hemorrhage
Destruction
(IMHA)
GI ulceration
Infectious

Decreased
erythropoietin
Bone marrow
aplasia

Figure 2.12.1 Algorithm for the pathophysiology of pallor.

K22463_C002.indd 77

25/04/16 10:11 am

78

General approach

to the heart), cardiac afterload (the force against which
the heart must contract), and myocardial contractility.
Hemorrhage and hypovolemia, including that caused
by severe dehydration, in addition to obstructive causes
such as pericardial effusion/tamponade and/or GDV or
large masses within the abdominal cavity, can result in
impaired cardiac preload. Hypothermia, as well as the
release of catecholamines to promote vasoconstriction
as an adaptive mechanism to maintain perfusion during
states of hypovolemia, can increase cardiac afterload.
Finally, primary cardiac disease such as dilated cardiomyopathy, end-stage mitral insufficiency, as well as
impaired contractility due to circulating inflammatory
cytokines with sepsis, can all result in impaired myocardial function and decreased cardiac output.
The second important contributor to pallor or lack
thereof is red blood cell mass and saturation of hemoglobin. Conditions associated with blood loss, such as hemorrhage, body cavity effusions/bleeding, GI ulceration,
and immune-mediated destruction of red blood cells,
can result in regenerative anemia. Inadequate erythropoiesis, as observed with end-stage renal disease, or
inadequate production at the level of the bone marrow,
as observed with myelophthisis or bone marrow aplasia, can also result in inadequate production of red blood
cells. Iron deficiency can result in inadequate production
of hemoglobin and a microcytic, hypochromic anemia.
Finally, lack of adequate saturation of hemoglobin with
oxygen, due to primary or secondary pulmonary disease,
can also result in clinical signs of pallor.

CLINICAL APPEARANCE
Once a thorough history is obtained, the physical examination should be performed, with careful attention paid
to perfusion parameters: heart rate, capillary refill time
(CRT), pulse rate, synchrony and quality, body temperature, and peripheral extremity warmth. The CRT normally
should be 1–1.5 seconds in a small animal patient. A brisk
CRT (<1 second) may be observed with compensatory
shock or sepsis, whereas a prolonged CRT (>2 seconds)
is observed in decompensatory shock or hypothermia.
Extreme tachycardia (>160 bpm in dogs, >220 bpm in cats)
or cardiac dysrhythmias may be observed with compensatory hypovolemic shock, anemia, or due to primary cardiac disease or other conditions such as GDV. In addition,
extremely low bradyarrhythmias, such as that observed
with sick sinus syndrome, 3rd degree AV block, or endstage decompensatory shock, can also result in the clinical
signs of pallor. Although perfusion parameters are very

K22463_C002.indd 78

different to hydration parameters, marked eye retraction
within the globe, dry mucous membranes, and extreme
skin turgor are also physical examination signs of severe
dehydration, which can result in hypovolemia. Careful
attention should be paid to auscultation of the heart and
the lungs. Muffled heart sounds may be present with pericardial tamponade, severe hypovolemia, or pleural effusion. The presence of both muffled heart and muffled lung
sounds should lead the clinician to consider pleural space
disease such as pleural effusion or pneumothorax. Harsh
lung sounds may be present with pulmonary contusions,
pneumonia, or hemorrhage, for example.

DIAGNOSIS
At the time a physical examination is being performed,
the patient’s blood pressure should be measured and ECG
performed to rule out systemic hypo- or hypertension
and cardiac dysrhythmias (Table 2.12.1). Pulse oximetry
should be considered to determine whether the patient is
hypoxemic. Initial diagnostic blood work should include
a packed cell volume (PCV) and total solids (TS), as well as
a CBC. If a patient is anemic (low PCV) with a concomitant
low TS, a source of whole blood loss should be considered.
If, however, the PCV is low with a normal TS, destruction
of red blood cells or lack of production should be considered. That is where the CBC, with a reticulocyte count, is
important, to determine if the anemia is regenerative
or nonregenerative. If an automated CBC is not possible,
performing a saline agglutination test and peripheral
blood smear to evaluate for the presence of spherocytes,
red blood cell parasites, anisocytosis, red blood cell pallor, and thrombocytopenia can be useful in an emergency situation. Tests of coagulation, particularly the
prothrombin time, can be useful as a screening test for
vitamin K antagonist rodenticide intoxication. Thoracic
and abdominal radiographs may be useful to investigate
for dilated cardiomyopathy, pericardial effusion, pulmonary parenchymal disease, pneumothorax, pleural effusion, abdominal effusion and masses, metallic foreign
material, GDV, or peritoneal effusion. Finally, a focused
assessment using sonography of the abdomen and thorax may prove to be useful in scanning for pericardial
or peritoneal effusion or pneumothorax.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Ortega-Simpson T (2010) Pallor. In: Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 7th edn. (eds. SJ Ettinger, EC Feldman)
Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 278–283.

25/04/16 10:11 am

Common clinical problems

79

Table 2.12.1 Differential diagnosis for pallor.
Anemia
•• Regenerative:
○○ Blood loss:
■■ Hemorrhage:
•• Trauma
•• Neoplasia
•• Toxin (vitamin K antagonist rodenticide)
■■ GI ulceration
■■ Body cavity effusion
■■ Destruction:
•• Immune mediated
•• Infectious
•• Toxin (zinc, Allium spp.)
•• Nonregenerative:
○○ Decreased erythropoietin – renal disease
○○ Bone marrow aplasia
○○ Anemia of chronic disease
Decreased oxygen delivery
•• Decreased cardiac output:
○○ Decreased preload:
■■ Hemorrhage/hypovolemia
■■ Abdominal mass/effusion/GDV
■■ Pericardial mass or effusion/tamponade
■■ Pleural effusion
■■ Pneumothorax/tension pneumothorax
○○ Increased afterload:
■■ Peripheral vasoconstriction:
•• Compensatory from cardiogenic or hypovolemic shock
•• Increased catecholamines (pheochromocytoma)
•• Hypothermia
•• Depressed myocardial contractility:
○○ Primary cardiac disease:
■■ Dilated cardiomyopathy
■■ End-stage mitral insufficiency
■■ HCM/HCOM/RCM/unclassified
○○ Secondary to circulating myocardial depressant cytokines:
■■ Sepsis
■■ Systemic inflammatory response
Decreased saturated hemoglobin
•• Pulmonary disease:
○○ Pulmonary hemorrhage
○○ Pulmonary contusions/trauma
○○ Pulmonary edema
○○ Pneumonia
○○ Neoplasia
○○ Pulmonary hypertension
•• Pleural space disease:
○○ Pleural effusion
○○ Pneumothorax
•• Metabolic/toxic:
○○ Methemoglobinemia
GDV, gastric dilatation volvulus; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HOCM, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy; RCM,
restrictive cardiomyopathy.

K22463_C002.indd 79

25/04/16 10:11 am

This page intentionally left blank

81

Part 2
Diseases of specific
organ systems
Chapter 3

Chapter 4
Chapter 5

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Diseases of the oral cavity
and teeth
Erin P. Ribka &
Brook A. Niemiec
Respiratory disorders
Cécile Clercx
Diseases of the pleural
space
J. Brad Case
Approach to thoracic
radiographs
L. Abbigail Granger
Cardiovascular disorders
Romain Pariaut & Carley
Saelinger

Chapter 8

Digestive diseases
(pharynx to anorectum)
Frédéric Gaschen

Chapter 9

Liver disorders
Joseph Taboada

Chapter 10 Pancreatic disorders
Michael Schaer

Chapter 12 Nephrology/urology
Mark Acierno
Chapter 13 Approach to abdominal
radiographs
L. Abbigail Granger
Chapter 14 Disorders of the nervous
system and muscle
Simon R. Platt
Chapter 15 Bone and joint disorders
Steven M. Fox
Chapter 16 Hematologic disorders
Katie M. Boes & Rose
E. Raskin
Chapter 17		Disorders of hemostasis
Bobbi Conner
Chapter 18 Dermatologic disorders
Diane T. Lewis
Chapter 19 Ocular manifestations of
systemic diseases
Dennis E. Brooks & Megan
L. Sullivan

Chapter 11 Endocrine disorders
Michael E. Herrtage

K22463_C003.indd 81

26/04/16 1:50 am

This page intentionally left blank

83

Chapter 3
Diseases of the oral cavity and teeth
Erin P. Ribka & Brook A. Niemiec

INTRODUCTION
Veterinary dentistry and oral surgery is a growing field.
Over the past decade, veterinarians and pet owners
alike are learning the importance of good oral health
for companion animals. Thanks to this and other medical and nutritional improvements, pets are living longer, healthier lives. Dental disease is more common
in our aging pet populations and, without proper care
throughout their lives, extensive treatment is increasingly necessary. Recent research supports the connection
between oral and systemic health, including diabetes,
cardiac, hepatic, renal, and pulmonary diseases, and an
increased incidence of certain neoplasias (particularly
oral). In this chapter, we aim to provide a basic overview
of normal oral anatomy and physiology as well as some
of the most common issues encountered in small animal
clinical practice. The entire breadth of oral diseases cannot be covered completely in a single chapter, therefore
resources for more detailed information are provided at
the end of this chapter.

Several tooth numbering systems exist for efficient
written or verbal communication regarding the oral
cavity. The most commonly used system is the modified
Triadan system. Each quadrant of the mouth is given
a number, as is each tooth. The right maxillary quadrant
is the 100 arch (500 for deciduous teeth), left maxillary is
200 (600), left mandibular 300 (700), and right mandibular is 400 (800). Teeth are numbered beginning with the
first incisor and moving distally (or caudally) as 01–10
in the canine maxilla and 01–11 in the canine mandible.
Therefore, the permanent right maxillary canine tooth
would be termed 104. The maxillary fourth premolars are
108 (right) and 208 (left), and the mandibular first molars
are 309 (left) and 409 (right). These teeth are typically
referred to as the carnassial teeth (Figures 3.1a, b).
Cats do not have a full complement of premolars and
molars and so are ‘missing’ several teeth (Figures 3.2a, b).

a

ANATOMY
A basic understanding of the oral anatomy and terminology is essential. The accepted dental formulas for the dog
and cat are as follows:
Canine deciduous (total = 28):
Maxilla (2×) - 3 incisors, 1 canine, 3 premolars
Mandible (2×) - 3 incisors, 1 canine, 3 premolars
Canine permanent (total = 42):
Maxilla (2×) - 3 incisors, 1 canine, 4 premolars,
2 molars
Mandible (2×) - 3 incisors, 1 canine, 4 premolars,
3 molars
Feline deciduous (total = 26):
Maxilla (2×) - 3 incisors, 1 canine, 3 premolars
Mandible (2×) - 3 incisors, 1 canine, 2 premolars
Feline permanent (total = 30):
Maxilla (2×) - 3 incisors, 1 canine, 3 premolars, 1 molar
Mandible (2×)- 3 incisors, 1 canine, 2 premolars, 1 molar

K22463_C003.indd 83

102 101 201

101

I3

104
C

109
110

202
2
204

105

P1

205

2

P2

206

2

P3

M3

311

410

M2

310

2

409

M1

309

2

408

P4

308

2

407
207

2
3

M

209

3

M2

210

3

Right
maxilla

1

Left
maxilla

307

2

P2

306

2

P1

305

1

C

304

P3

406
405

208

P4
1

3.1

411

203

106
107

108

b

1

I3
I2 I1

404

1
1

403
303
402 401 301 302

Right
mandible

Left No. of
mandible roots

Figures 3.1a, b Modified Triadan numbering system in
the dog. (a) Maxilla (3-rooted teeth numbered in red);
(b) mandible. (From Niemiec BA (2011) Small Animal Dental,
Oral & Maxillofacial Disease: A Color Handbook. CRC Press,
London, with permission)

26/04/16 1:50 am

84

Diseases of specific organ systems

Dogs

Cats

Incisors

Canines

Premolars

Molars

Incisors

Canines

Premolars

Molars

Deciduous
(weeks)

3–4

3

4–12

-

2–3

3–4

3–4

-

Permanent
(months)

3–5

4–6

4–6

5–7

3–4

4–5

4–6

4–5

a

102
103

101 201
202
203

I3 I

2

104

I1

1
1

204

C
106

3.2

206

P2

107

(2 roots
in 10.3%)

207

P3
108

208

P4
M1

209

109
Right
maxilla

Left
maxilla

(1 root in 27.7%
2 fully formed roots in 9.2%
2 partly fused roots in 55.1%

b

(1 root in 35%
2 fully formed roots in 28%
2 partly fused roots in 34.7%

M1

P4

408

2

309

409

2

308
P3

407

2

307
C
304

404

1
1

I3 I2 I

1

403

402
401

Right
mandible

302
301

303
Left
mandible

No. of
roots

Figures 3.2a, b Modified Triadan numbering system in
the cat. (a) Maxilla (3-rooted teeth numbered in red);
(b) mandible. (From Niemiec BA (2011) Small Animal Dental,
Oral & Maxillofacial Disease: A Color Handbook. CRC Press,
London, with permission)

K22463_C003.indd 84

The eruption times of deciduous and permanent teeth
in the dog and cat are shown above:
Directionally, surfaces of teeth are referred to as
(Figures 3.3a, b):

●●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

Mesial: nearer the rostral midline.
Distal: away from the rostral midline.
Buccal surfaces face the inside of the cheeks.
Labial surfaces face the lips.
Lingual surfaces are next to the tongue.
Palatal surfaces face the palate.

It is also important to understand tooth structure and
development. The crowns of teeth are covered in enamel,
which is the hardest substance in the body. Enamel cannot be regrown once it is lost and is much thinner in dogs
and cats (<1 mm) than in humans. Beneath the enamel
is dentin, which has a mineral content similar to bone.
It is comprised of numerous microscopic dentinal tubules
(Figure 3.4). Each dentinal tubule contains an odontoblastic process, which is essentially an extension of the root
canal system. Dentin is produced throughout life and
this accounts for the decreasing width of the pulp canal
evident on dental radiographs as patients age. Dentin is
porous and irritation or injury may incite its component
cells to protect the tooth by forming reparative or tertiary
dentin. Vessels and nerves enter and exit the teeth through
the tip of the root or the apex. The entire root structure (in
normal teeth) is surrounded and supported by the periodontal ligament, which holds teeth in place in the surrounding alveolar bone. The periodontium consists of the
gingiva, periodontal ligament, cementum, and alveolar
bone. The gingiva is part of the specialized mucosa that
protects the tooth and supporting structures from infection and detachment. Cementum covers the root much as
enamel covers the crown of the tooth, increasing with age.

ORAL EXAMINATION
Conscious visual examination may be limited or fairly
detailed, depending on the patient’s temperament and
the skill of the examiner. It may be possible to diagnose persistent deciduous teeth, fractured teeth, caries,
tooth resorptions, masses, and malocclusions/orthodontic

26/04/16 1:44 am

Diseases of the oral cavity and teeth

a

3.3

Vestibular or Buccal
Palatal

Coronal

Lingual

Lingual

Caudal
Rostral

Positions and directions
Surfaces
b

Mesial
Distal

Lingual (Mandible)
or
Palatal (Maxilla)

Vestibular
or Labial Mesial

Alevolar mucosa

Apical delta
Nasal cavity

Gingival
sulcus

Periodontal
ligament
Cementoenamel junction
Pulp chamber
Dentin

Median
plane

3.5

Lingual (Mandible)
or Palatal (Maxilla)
Distal

Distal

Vestibular or Labial

Root canal

Mucogingival
junction

Figure 3.4 An adult maxillary tooth and its peridontium.
(From Niemiec BA (2011) Small Animal Dental, Oral &
Maxillofacial Disease: A Color Handbook. CRC Press, London,
with permission)

Mesial

Distal

Apex

Enamel
Distal

3.4

Alevolar bone

Free gingival
groove
Crown

Dorsal
Ventral

Root

Apical
Vestibular or
Labial or Facial

85

Vestibular
or Buccal

Figures 3.3a, b Dental anatomic terminology. (a) Extraoral
view; (b) intraoral view. (From Niemiec BA (2011) Small
Animal Dental, Oral & Maxillofacial Disease: A Color Handbook.
CRC Press, London, with permission)

problems and to develop a preliminary sense of the level
of ­periodontal disease. (Note: The conscious evaluation
is not a replacement for an anesthetized examination.)
There are many factors that make a complete examination impossible in an awake animal, not least of which
are pain and aggression. An anesthetized examination
should include a complete visual assessment of the entire
oral cavity, including all soft and hard tissues, ­periodontal
probing and exploring of all aspects of individual teeth
and gingival sulci, and intraoral radiography of any
abnormalities. Further, many veterinary dentists recommend full mouth radiographs be obtained for all dental patients. Therefore, all anesthetized patients should
receive an oral examination (Figures 3.5–3.8).

Figure 3.5 Impacted right maxillary first molar (109) in
a 7-month-old Golden Retriever presented for routine
orchiectomy.
3.6

PERIODONTAL DISEASE
Definition/overview
Periodontal disease is the most common disease affecting small animal patients. It has long been established
that 70% of cats and 80% of dogs exhibit some level of
periodontal disease by 3 years of age. However, current

K22463_C003.indd 85

Figure 3.6 Complicated crown fracture with exposed pulp of
the left mandibular second molar (310). This injury was noted by
the technician monitoring anesthesia during a routine, elective
ovariectomy in a 7-month-old mixed breed dog.

26/04/16 1:44 am

86

Diseases of specific organ systems

3.9

3.7

Figure 3.9 Canine periodontal disease. Note the red, swollen
gingiva. The significant calculus buildup does not equate to
severity of periodontal disease.
3.8
3.10

Figures 3.7, 3.8 (3.7) Evidence of developmental enamel
abnormality and tooth root abscess was noted in the area of the
tooth adjacent to the fractured molar. (3.8) Dental radiographs
were exposed and the first molar was found to be non-vital.
The teeth were deemed unsalvageable and surgically extracted
during the same anesthetic episode. Note the periodontal
lucency around tooth roots in the radiograph (black arrows).
This is the same dog as in Figure 3.6.

research suggests that 90% or more of dogs have some
degree of periodontal disease by just 1 year of age
(Figure 3.9).
Periodontal disease encompasses gingivitis and periodontitis, which each represent a stage in the progression
of the disease complex. Gingivitis is the earlier, reversible stage of inflammation confined to the gingival tissues. Once the inflammation reaches the deeper tissues
of the periodontium (periodontal ligament and alveolar
bone), it becomes periodontitis. Periodontal inflammation may result in osteoclastic resorption of the alveolar
bone (Figures 3.10, 3.11). This bone loss is considered
irreversible without advanced periodontal surgeries
­
and guided tissue regeneration. Therefore, prevention

K22463_C003.indd 86

Figure 3.10 Canine periodontitis. The probe is inserted to a
depth of 11 mm. This is a deep periodontal pocket, requiring
radiographs to rule out periodontal–endodontic disease and
open curettage or extraction.

is critical. There are numerous significant local/regional
consequences of advanced periodontal disease, ­including:
ocular disease or damage; pathologic mandibular
­fractures; osteomyelitis; oral cancers; and periodontal–
endodontic infections/abscesses.
In addition, recent research has linked periodontal disease to many deleterious systemic effects such as:
hepatic inflammation and disease; glomerulonephritis
and renal insufficiency; valvular endocarditis and heart
disease; cerebral infarction (strokes); diabetes mellitus;
and early mortality.

Etiology
Plaque is the cause of periodontal disease. Plaque is
a biofilm of oral bacteria. A biofilm is a unique compilation of organisms (bacteria), minerals, and proteins that
develops into a complex structure, significantly more
resistant to antibiotics and antiseptics than any of the
individual bacteria themselves.

26/04/16 1:44 am

Diseases of the oral cavity and teeth

3.11

Figure 3.11 Feline periodontal disease. The probe reaches
to a depth of 4–5 mm, necessitating radiographs, closed root
planing, and perioceutic administration at a minimum.

Pathophysiology
The development of periodontal disease begins with the
adherence of plaque to oral structures, particularly teeth.
The first step in the adherence of plaque to teeth is pellicle formation, followed by an initial adhesion and attachment and, finally, colonization and plaque maturation.
There are a variety of conditions that result in roughened
tooth surfaces and may increase plaque retention, including enamel hypoplasia, enamel defects, crown fractures,
crowding, tooth resorptions, and malocclusions.
The rate and degree of progression of periodontal
disease are determined by a combination of bacterial
infection and host (patient) response. Systemic diseases
(such as diabetes mellitus, endogenous or exogenous
hypercortisolemia) that increase host susceptibility to
infection and/or decrease wound healing also contribute to periodontal disease. It is more common in small
and toy breed dogs, probably because of tooth crowding,
extended life spans, and other genetic factors.

Clinical presentation
The vast majority of patients with periodontal disease
show no outward signs of disease. Patients with advanced
disease may present with halitosis, ptyalism, pain, pawing at the mouth, tooth exfoliation, or even pathologic
jaw fractures. Periodontal disease may be noted on routine conscious oral examination, but is best diagnosed
during anesthetized oral examination with probing and
intraoral dental radiographs.

Differential diagnosis
Neoplasia, immune-mediated disease, resorptive lesions,
foreign bodies, candidiasis (thrush).

K22463_C003.indd 87

87

Diagnosis
Gingival inflammation (redness and swelling) is the first
outward sign of periodontal disease. However, bleeding
on probing or brushing is actually the first sign of periodontal disease, therefore diagnosis is often delayed.
These signs – redness, swelling, and bleeding – are
enough to warrant a diagnosis of gingivitis. It is critical to
note that while dental calculus (tartar) is typically associated with periodontal disease, it is not the source of the
disease. Therefore it should not be relied on to determine
a need for professional therapy. Orastrip® (PDx Biotech),
a relatively new product, can be used quickly and easily
in the awake patient to test for the presence of thiol compounds, metabolic products of the subgingival biofilm
that are the cause of periodontal disease. This will provide a diagnosis earlier in the disease process as well as
an objective measure as to the level of periodontal disease. This knowledge may improve client compliance and
allow earlier intervention.
Gingivitis may be diagnosed in the conscious patient
by the gross appearance of red or swollen gums or in the
owner’s reporting of bleeding on brushing. Periodontitis
generally requires anesthetized examination with probing and dental radiographs for diagnosis, unless there is
marked gingival recession.
Periodontal probing of the circumference of each tooth
during the anesthetized examination may reveal pocket
depths greater than the normal gingival sulcular depth
(generally 0–3 mm in dogs, 0–0.5 mm in cats). A normal
probing depth does not necessarily indicate a ­disease-free
state, as teeth affected by gingivitis can have normal sulcular depth or gingival recession. A simple color coded
probe (Niemiec periodontal probe, Dentalaire Products)
has been developed to allow easy diagnosis of pathologic
periodontal pockets. Periodontal disease may also be
identified on dental radiography.

Management
Thorough anesthetized professional periodontal ­therapy
and consistent home care are vital to the management
of periodontal disease. Gingivitis can be reversed with
such treatment. Pathologic pockets less than 6 mm are
best treated with closed root planing and perioceutic
treatment (Doxirobe, Zoetis; Clindoral, Trilogic Pharma).
Deeper pockets, or teeth with class II or III furcation,
must be treated with periodontal flap surgery and open
curettage (+/- guided tissue regeneration), or extracted.
Following these additional therapies, regular professional periodontal therapy and diligent home care are
required. Teeth often become unsalvageable and require
extraction. Examples include significantly mobile teeth

26/04/16 1:44 am

88

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 3.1 Malocclusion classifications.
•• Class 0. Normal (orthoclusion). The mandibular canines are equidistant between the maxillary third incisor and canine, the
mandibular incisors sit just caudal to the maxillary incisors, and the premolars of the maxillary and mandibular arches interdigitate in a manner reminiscent of pinking shears, hence the term scissors bite.
•• Class I. Normal jaw lengths (scissors bite) where one or more teeth are out of proper alignment (occlusion). These have been
considered nonhereditary. However, the high incidence of certain syndromes in specific breeds does indicate a genetic predisposition. Class I malocclusions include linguoversed mandibular (base narrow) canines and mesioversed maxillary canines
(lance effect). The former typically results in significant palatal trauma.
•• Class II. Mandibular brachygnathism; the mandible is shorter than the maxilla. Also called overshot. This almost invariably
causes significant palatal or tooth trauma.
•• Class III. This is a jaw length discrepancy in which the mandible is longer than the maxilla, and is also referred to as undershot.
This class of malocclusion does not typically create significant trauma, but maxillary incisors may impinge on opposing soft
and hard tissues and should be carefully examined.
•• Class IV. ‘Wry bite’. This is a jaw length discrepancy in which one mandible or maxilla is shorter than the other. This results in
a shift of the mandibular midline. A true class IV malocclusion occurs when one mandible is longer than the maxilla and the
other mandible is shorter than the maxilla.

3.13

3.12

Figure 3.12 Normoclusion. Scissors bite.

or periodontal–endodontic lesions. Small teeth may also
be sacrificially extracted to better access and treat more
strategic teeth.

Prognosis
Outcomes depend much on severity of disease, quality of
treatment and client commitment. Prognosis therefore
ranges from good to guarded to poor.

Figure 3.13 Class II malocclusion. Also termed overbite or
overshot, the mandible is shorter than the maxilla. This
malocclusion often requires interceptive orthodontia to relieve
trauma and allow the mandible to develop to its full potential.

MALOCCLUSION
A malocclusion is a deviation of one or more teeth and/
or jaws from normal alignment. Malocclusions may
be cosmetic only, or result in slight to significant oral
trauma. Malocclusions are categorized by class (Table 3.1;
Figures 3.12–3.14).

­dissimilar jaw lengths. Mesioccluded or ‘lance’ canines
are also considered genetic (seen commonly in Shetland
Sheepdogs and Persian cats). Nongenetic causes of malocclusions include trauma or systemic influences such as
severe illnesses, nutritional disturbances, or endocrine
diseases. In general, these nongenetic causes have historical or other clinical support.

Etiology

Clinical presentation

Most malocclusions are considered hereditary in nature,
in particular the jaw length malocclusions (class II, III,
IV). They may result from inbreeding to produce desirable head size or shape, or from matings of parents with

Patients often show no overt clinical signs, but may present for oral pain, bleeding, ptyalism, aggression, ‘mouth
shyness’, halitosis, periodontal disease, or even an oronasal fistula.

Definition/overview

K22463_C003.indd 88

26/04/16 1:44 am

Diseases of the oral cavity and teeth

3.14

Figure 3.14 Class III malocclusion in an adult dog. Also termed
underbite or undershot, the mandible is longer than the maxilla
and the mandibular incisors are rostral to the maxillary incisors.
3.15

89

be a long and uncomfortable process. If a malocclusion is
diagnosed in the deciduous dentition, interceptive orthodontics can be attempted. This involves extraction of
the deciduous dentition that is causing the trauma and/
or resulting in an adverse dental interlock (not allowing
the jaws to grow to their full genetic potential).
Orthodontic treatment should never be performed in
patients destined for breeding or showing. Malocclusions
resulting in oral trauma or prevention of normal mandibular growth should be treated early and aggressively.
This may be achieved by extraction of the offending tooth
or teeth, coronal reduction and vital pulp therapy, or
orthodontic appliances. All clients should receive genetic
counseling.

Prognosis
Successful treatment is dependent on early diagnosis and
appropriate intervention. Clients should receive counseling on the genetic basis of most malocclusions. Neutering
is generally recommended.

PERSISTENT DECIDUOUS TEETH
Definition/overview
A deciduous tooth is considered persistent if it
remains present in the oral cavity after the corresponding permanent tooth has erupted to any degree.

Etiology

Figure 3.15 A persistent deciduous maxillary incisor tooth
(603) in an adult dog. Note the associated periodontal disease
demonstrated by the placement of the probe.

Differential diagnosis
Trauma, temporomandibular joint dislocation, mandibular fracture, normal bite for the breed.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis can usually be made with visual examination.
Some malocclusions may require sedation for accurate
and complete evaluation and diagnosis. Dental radiographs should be made to evaluate the involved teeth
for periodontal or endodontic disease.

Management
Treatment depends on type and severity. If the malocclusion is purely cosmetic, intervention is neither warranted nor recommended, as orthodontic correction can

K22463_C003.indd 89

The most common cause of this condition is an aberrant
eruption path of the permanent tooth. Lack of a permanent tooth as well as nutritional or hormonal imbalances
may also result in persistent deciduous teeth.

Pathophysiology
As the permanent tooth erupts along its natural path, the
pressure it places on the apex of the root of the deciduous
tooth results in resorption of the deciduous tooth root. As
the permanent tooth continues its coronal ­advancement,
the root continues to resorb and eventually exfoliates
and the permanent tooth assumes its place. When the
permanent tooth fails to follow its natural path, the
deciduous tooth root does not receive the proper pressure
to result in adequate resorption for exfoliation.

Clinical presentation
While they typically occur in toy and small breed dogs,
persistent deciduous teeth may occur in any breed as well
as in cats. The condition is often bilateral and most commonly affects the canine teeth, followed by the incisors
and premolars (Figure 3.15).

26/04/16 1:44 am

90

Diseases of specific organ systems

3.16

3.17

Figure 3.16 Dental radiograph of a persistent deciduous tooth
with periapical lucency in an 8-year-old dog.

Figure 3.17 Persistent deciduous maxillary canine tooth (604).
Note the thin, fragile walls.

Differential diagnosis
Supernumerary teeth, lack of associated permanent
tooth, crown malformation.

possible, as they may become infected and/or act as a
foreign body and result in significant inflammation and
discomfort (Figure 3.17).

Diagnosis

Prognosis

Conscious oral examination is usually sufficient for diagnosis of persistent canines; however, since the deciduous
maxillary fourth premolars are palatal to the permanent
ones, anesthesia may be required. Sedated or anesthetized
examination and intraoral radiographs may be necessary
to accurately distinguish between supernumerary teeth,
crown malformation, and lack of permanent dentition.

Prognosis is good if detected and treated very early and
carefully. Permanent teeth damaged during extraction of
deciduous teeth or retained roots may exhibit evidence
of enamel defects. Orthodontic consequences may occur
within 2 weeks of the first sign of eruption of secondary
dentition and irreversible periodontal disease may begin
even earlier.

Management

MISSING TEETH

Early detection and extraction of offending teeth is critical. Two teeth of the same type should never occupy the
same place at the same time, as periodontal and orthodontic damage can occur very quickly. The authors recommend enlisting clients in monitoring for the appearance
of this condition, instructing them in home care from
the time of the first puppy (or kitten) visit and evaluating the oral cavity thoroughly at each vaccine booster
appointment. The deciduous tooth should be extracted as
soon as the permanent begins to erupt, unless the deciduous tooth is significantly mobile. Intraoral radiographs
should be exposed prior to and following extraction, as
these teeth can be quite difficult to remove because of
their long roots and thin, fragile walls. In addition, partial and complete root resorption may further complicate
extraction (Figure 3.16). Patience and great care must
be taken to avoid damaging the unerupted permanent
tooth. Root remnants should not be left behind if at all

K22463_C003.indd 90

Definition/overview
Hypodontia is the congenital absence of one to five permanent teeth. Oligodontia is the congenital absence of
six or more permanent teeth. Anodontia is the congenital
lack of all permanent teeth.

Etiology
May be congenital or developmental.

Pathophysiology
Permanent teeth are formed from buds of the deciduous teeth with the exception of the molars and first
premolars, which have no corresponding deciduous.
A truly missing deciduous tooth will result in lack of a
permanent tooth. Hypodontia of deciduous dentition is
extremely rare; more often, a deciduous tooth is prematurely lost to trauma.

26/04/16 1:44 am

Diseases of the oral cavity and teeth

91

3.18

Genetic conditions resulting in defects of tooth
development are the most common cause of missing
­
teeth. Developmental disturbances can also have a profound effect on tooth development. In addition, trauma,
medications, and gestational problems can also result in
significant tooth anomalies and defects.

Clinical presentation
Most often an incidental finding, most patients are not
clinically presented solely for missing teeth. However,
they show signs of pain or discomfort, swelling, or mandibular fracture.

Differential diagnosis

3.19

Previous extraction, avulsion, or fracture; retained tooth
root, impaction/embedded/unerupted tooth.

Diagnosis
Unless the practitioner has previous information from
prior examination or surgery (including postoperative
radiographs) that the tooth was extracted or otherwise
not present, diagnosis must be confirmed with intraoral radiography. Missing teeth are generally diagnosed
on awake examination. However, sedation or anesthesia is often required to diagnose missing molars
(Figures 3.18, 3.19).

Management
All ‘missing’ teeth should be radiographed to rule out
impacted teeth or retained roots. These should be
extracted once diagnosed unless the patient is geriatric,
the tooth has undergone significant replacement resorption, and/or the extraction would be challenging, in which
case referral to a veterinary dentist is recommended.
A ‘wait and see’ approach in a young patient is generally
considered inappropriate. Congenitally missing teeth do
not require intervention beyond intraoral radiography
for diagnosis. Genetic counseling may be warranted.

Prognosis
Prognosis is good if appropriate surgical intervention
is taken when necessary. Impacted teeth that are not
removed may develop dentigerous cysts, which can
have significant consequences, such as tooth displacement, which may lead to malocclusion, tooth and/or
bone resorption, or a pathologic fracture (see Appendix:
Clinical case 1.) Rarely, dentigerous cyst lining has been
reported to undergo malignant transformation. Retained
tooth roots can become infected and cause significant
pain as well as local and systemic infection.

K22463_C003.indd 91

Figures 3.18, 3.19 Missing mandibular premolars in a
6-year-old male neutered Catahoula Leopard Dog. Congenital
oligodontia was confirmed with intraoral radiography.

FRACTURED TEETH
Definition/overview
Fractured teeth are classified by location of the fracture
(crown, root, or both) and whether or not the pulp is
exposed. Tooth fractures that result in pulp exposure are
referred to as complicated; those that do not result in
pulp exposure are termed uncomplicated.

Etiology
Tooth fractures occur as a result of excessive force
applied to a tooth or stresses that act on a tooth in
a nonphysiological direction. They commonly occur
­secondarily to biting or chewing on rocks, bones, hard
chew toys, and even hard rawhides. They may also
be the result of impact trauma (e.g. automobile accidents,
running into walls, horse kicks, falls) (Figures 3.20, 3.21).

26/04/16 1:44 am

92

Diseases of specific organ systems

3.20

3.21

3.22

the enamel is dentin, a softer, rougher substance
made up of dentinal tubules that lead directly to the
dental pulp.
When a crown fractures and the pulp is exposed, it is
initially exceedingly painful. In addition, an open path
to the blood vessels and nerves of the tooth is created,
leading quickly to pulpitis, infection, and pulp necrosis.
Following pulp necrosis, bacterial invasion of the periapical area occurs, which may create systemic spread of
the infection.
Uncomplicated crown fractures result in direct
dentinal exposure, which is considered indirect pulp
exposure, as the dentinal tubules contain extensions
of the root canal system called odontoblasts. These
fractures may also result in significant pain for the
patient. Furthermore, there is an opportunity for eventual infection of the pulp through the dentinal tubules.
How long that process takes is unknown and is likely
affected by the amount of damage inflicted on the pulp
and other tissues during the initial insult. Typically,
the tooth will eventually respond to this exposure and
seal off the tubules via t­ertiary dentin, but this process
takes months and may not be ­effective. Finally, all fractures result in a ­
roughened tooth surface increasing
plaque adhesion and ­hastening the onset of periodontal
disease.

Clinical presentation

Figures 3.20–3.22 (3.20, 3.21) Complicated crown fractures of
the right maxillary 4th premolar (108) and mandibular canine
(404). Note the darkened, necrotic pulp and the explorer
within the pulp cavity of 108 (3.20) and the fresh, hemorrhagic
pulp of 104 (3.21). (3.22) This is a slab-type fracture of the
left maxillary 4th premolar (208). This particular tooth has a
complicated crown-root fracture, but slab fractures are very
common in dogs and may be complicated or uncomplicated.

If the inciting cause is significant traumatic impact (i.e.
hit by car/fall), patients may be presented with other
injuries (e.g. facial or jaw fractures, head trauma, pulmonary contusions, abdominal bleeding). These patients
must be stabilized and treated appropriately prior to
complete oral examination, assessment, and treatment.
Owners may notice swelling or drainage in the area of
the affected tooth, most commonly in the maxilla just
ventral to the eye, but it may also occur in the ventral
mandible.
The majority of the time tooth fractures are i­ ncidental
findings, as pets very rarely show signs of oral pain.
However, it is known that these conditions are very
painful. Animals may present with some degree of
pain, halitosis, reluctance to chew, or changes in eating
­behaviors (bear in mind that cats and dogs generally do
not stop ­eating because of dental disease, except in very
­limited cases such as caudal stomatitis).

Pathophysiology

Differential diagnosis

Enamel is the extremely hard, smooth, impervious substance covering the crowns of normal teeth. Underlying

Abrasive wear, attrition (tooth on tooth wear), developmental malformation, oral tumor.

K22463_C003.indd 92

26/04/16 1:44 am

Diseases of the oral cavity and teeth

Diagnosis
Fractured teeth are generally simple to diagnose
on awake examination or incidentally during pro­
fessional periodontal therapy. Freshly fractured teeth
are identified by an abnormally shaped area of the
tooth and a roughened surface (dentin) compared with
the surrounding tooth (enamel) if uncomplicated, and
by a central area of pink or red (pulp) if complicated
(Figure 3.21).
Older fractures may be more difficult to identify if they
have been covered in plaque and calculus. Pulp necrosis
may be evident as a dark brown, gray, or black central
area of the tooth in an older, complicated, crown fracture.
Root fractures may not be apparent until sedated examination and radiographs are possible.

Management
All fractured teeth should be radiographed to evaluate
for evidence of endodontic disease. Fractured deciduous
teeth should be extracted urgently to prevent damage
to the underlying permanent tooth bud. Uncomplicated
crown fractures should be managed with bonded sealants if there is no radiographic evidence of endodontic
disease and the pulp chamber cannot be accessed with a
fine dental explorer. This will relieve the pain, block off
the pathway of infection, and smooth the tooth. Crown/
root fractures that are uncomplicated may be treated
with bonded sealant if the gingiva is first repositioned
apically so that the sealant does not extend below the
gingival margin (Figure 3.22). Some root fractures may
be managed with benign neglect if no portion of the fracture extends into the oral cavity, the tooth is stable, and
there is no evidence of endodontic disease. Complicated
crown fractures and uncomplicated crown fractures with
evidence of endodontic disease on intraoral radiographs
must be treated either with root canal therapy or by complete extraction. Root fractures and teeth treated with
bonded sealants or root canal therapy must be rechecked
radiographically at 9–12 months and annually thereafter.
Toys and chews should be checked for hardness, in order
to avoid risk of tooth fracture. Proper items should be easily indented with a fingernail. Owners must be warned
about the causes of tooth fractures and changes implemented at home if fractures are secondary to chew toys,
treats, or housing. The inciting cause should be removed
and replaced with softer, less dangerous options if at all
possible. Owners should also be counseled that bonded
sealants are only effective for as long as they remain on
the tooth; in other words, until the tooth breaks again.
Referral to a veterinary dentist for crown placement
should be considered, especially for working dogs and

K22463_C003.indd 93

93

those extreme chewers that are at high risk for recurrent
tooth fractures.

Prognosis
Early, appropriate treatment after complete examination,
probing, and intraoral radiography provides the best
outcome. Referral to a veterinary dental specialist for
endodontic treatment, crown therapy or to manage complicated or multiple tooth fractures when necessary is
recommended. Fractured teeth are painful to the patient,
although they will not complain. Recovery from surgical extraction is approximately 2 weeks; recovery from
endodontic treatment is nearly immediate (1–2 days).
In either case, prognosis is very good if the pet receives
timely, appropriate treatment.

TEMPOROMANDIBULAR JOINT LUXATION
Definition/overview
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) luxation is usually a
rostrodorsal displacement of the condylar process of the
mandible from the articular surface of the mandibular
fossa of the temporal bone. The TMJ may sometimes separate caudally, and this displacement is usually accompanied by a fracture of the retroarticular process.

Etiology/pathophysiology
TMJ luxation is uncommon in cats and rare in dogs. It
is usually traumatic in nature. It is therefore also often
accompanied by other oromaxillofacial injuries. It may
also be a result of TMJ dysplasia or disease.

Clinical presentation
Patients often present with an open or dropped jaw
appearance, an inability to close (or sometimes to open)
the mouth, and lateral deviation of the lower jaw towards
the side opposite the luxation. Joint pain, dysphagia, or
ankylosis may accompany chronic TMJ luxations, as well
as TMJ fractures or ramus fractures.

Differential diagnosis
Mandibular fracture, maxillary fracture, TMJ dysplasia/
fracture, periodontal disease, foreign body, idiopathic trigeminal neuritis, craniomandibular osteopathy.

Diagnosis
The classical dropped jaw appearance and inability to
close the mouth is suggestive, although this may also be
seen with idiopathic trigeminal neuritis or bilateral caudal mandibular fracture. Properly positioned dorsoventral radiographs may show an increased TMJ space. CT is

26/04/16 1:44 am

94

Diseases of specific organ systems

also useful to confirm the diagnosis. Radiographs should
be exposed to evaluate for concurrent maxillary or mandibular fractures.

Management
Under general anesthesia, a fulcrum of an appropriate
size for the patient (e.g. pencil, dowel, toothbrush, syringe)
is placed between the maxillary fourth premolar and
mandibular first molar teeth on the affected side and the
mouth is gently forced closed to lever the condylar process back into the mandibular fossa. A return to normal
dental occlusion is indicative of successful reduction. The
joint should then be stabilized with a loose fitting nylon
or tape muzzle, or with interarcade wiring for 1–2 weeks,
especially if it easily reluxates. Unstable, refractory, or
chronic luxations can be treated with open reduction and
suture imbrication of the joint or, more commonly, with a
condylectomy procedure.

Prognosis
Acute, uncomplicated luxations that are properly reduced
and managed have a good prognosis. Those associated
with chronicity, recurrence, underlying disease, dysplasia, or ramus fractures carry a less favorable prognosis
and frequently result in condylectomy.

In the dog, mandibular ramus fractures are less common
than either symphyseal separation or mandibular body
fractures, and repair can be very difficult because of the
large amount of overlying musculature. TMJ fractures
are uncommon. Maxillary fractures are often minimally
displaced because of the inherent stability of the maxilla.
Midline palatal features are commonly a result of highrise syndrome in cats. Like mandibular symphyseal separation, these are not true fractures, but a separation of
the interincisive suture or the median palatine sutures.
Pathologic fractures are not uncommonly seen and are
usually the result of chronic, severe, untreated periodontal disease or, rarely, a neoplastic process.

Clinical presentation
Patients may present with an obvious malocclusion or
fracture, particularly of the mandible, or with symphyseal separation. Swelling, pain, soft tissue trauma, and
ptyalism are common. Inability to open or close the
mouth may be noted. Maxillary fractures in particular
may present more subtly, with minimal displacement.
3.23a

MAXILLOFACIAL/JAW FRACTURES
Definition/overview
Oromaxillofacial fractures are usually the result of traumatic injury but may also occur secondary to a pathologic
process. In the case of trauma, patients may have significant injury to other body systems or other serious complications and should be stabilized prior to treatment for
oromaxillofacial injury. Pathologic fractures can be difficult to treat because of issues related to delayed healing
or underlying neoplastic or infectious conditions.

a
3.23b

Etiology/pathophysiology
There is a wide variety of types and causes of maxillofacial and mandibular fractures. In the cat, symphyseal
separation is the most common oral ‘fracture’ and mandibular ramus fractures are more common than those
of the mandibular body. Fractures to the body of the
mandible are most commonly seen in dogs and may be
termed stable (Figure 3.23a) or unstable (Figure 3.23b)
depending on the angle of the fracture line, with stable
fractures running in a caudodorsal direction. The large
muscles of the jaw insert at the caudal aspect of the mandible and compress the fragments of favorable fractures.

K22463_C003.indd 94

b
Figures 3.23a, b A left mandible demonstrating a stable
(a) and an unstable (b) fracture line. The large white arrows
indicate the directional pull of the masticatory muscles. Small
white arrows illustrate the subsequent forces placed on the
fracture line. In 3.23a, the muscular forces keep the fracture in
place; in 3.23b, the unstable direction of the fracture leads to
distraction of the fracture line.

26/04/16 1:44 am

Diseases of the oral cavity and teeth

In some patients, the maxillofacial or mandibular
­fracture is not noticed for a day or several days after
the initial traumatic incident, when the owner notes
that the animal is reluctant or unable to eat, drops food
from the mouth, or is malodorous. Patients with pathologic jaw fractures tend to be nonpainful and often
lack an obvious history of trauma. This is because the
weakened bone took minimal force to fracture. Further,
these ­fractures are typically seen in the areas of the
mandibular first molars or canines of small and toy
breed dogs. This is because their teeth are proportionally larger than those of large breed dogs and comprise
a significant amount of the mandible.

Differential diagnosis
Trauma, severe periodontal disease, neoplasia, TMJ luxation, osteomyelitis, hypoparathyroidism (rare).

Diagnosis
Careful examination under sedation or general anesthesia (if the patient is stable) and intraoral and skull
radiography may all be utilized to determine the exact
nature and extent of the injury. Depending on presentation, thoracic and abdominal radiographs, abdominal
ultrasound, or CT may be indicated as well as CBC/chemistry panel/urinalysis, T4, and parathyroid hormone level.
Histopathology and bacterial culture and sensitivity may
also be warranted in unusual cases.
Pathologic jaw fractures require intraoral dental radiographs to properly diagnose and treat. The subtle loss of
bone is often not seen on skull radiographs. The classic
appearance of a pathologic fracture is one located at the
mandibular first molar or canine in a small breed dog
with associated periodontal disease.

Management
Symphyseal separation can generally be treated
with simple circumferential wire stabilization.
Generally, mandibular body fractures are best repaired
with intraoral splinting and either interdental or interosseous wiring techniques to recreate proper occlusion
of the teeth. However, unstable or comminuted fractures often require greater fixation. Plates and external fixation techniques are occasionally indicated, but
great care must be taken to avoid damaging tooth roots
and neurovascular structures. Fractures of the mandibular ramus, condylar, coronoid, and angular processes are usually managed conservatively due to the
great difficulty in performing internal repair. Many of

K22463_C003.indd 95

95

these fractures are managed by interarch bonding or
with loose nylon ­muzzles for 2–3 weeks (if a unilateral
fracture dorsal to the condylar process) or 4–5 weeks
(if below the c­ ondylar process). Maxillary fractures are
often ­minimally ­displaced and more stable than mandibular fractures, and so require no more than digital
reduction and soft tissue repair. However, more significant fractures require reduction and stabilization (typically an acrylic splint).
Pathologic jaw fractures carry a guarded prognosis for healing due to the lack of remaining bone, the
low oxygen tension in the area, and the difficulty in
rigidly ­
fixating the caudal mandible. It is important
to realize that a pathologic fracture will not heal (no
matter how good the fi
­ xation is) if the diseased tooth
root is not removed from the area of the fracture line.
This is because a diseased root acts as a nidus of infection, which ­prevents ­healing. Extraction of the diseased
root ­associated with the area of fracture is necessary,
but unfortunately ­
creates a large defect in the bone,
which makes alignment more ­challenging and increases
­healing time.

Prognosis
Oromaxillofacial fractures often occur concurrently with
other serious injuries and patients must be well stabilized prior to treatment of maxillary or mandibular fractures. Malocclusion is a serious potential complication of
oromaxillofacial fracture and repair. Invasive fixation
methods are only rarely necessary and often result in further damage to surrounding oral structures such as teeth
and neurovascular tissues. There is a concern with mandibular ramus fractures for callus formation, which resu­
lts in restriction of normal jaw movement. In addition,
there is often damage to teeth during the initial insult that
may not be immediately apparent. Recheck examination
and radiographs are always indicated for jaw fractures.
Pathologic fractures caused by severe periodontal
disease or neoplastic processes carry a guarded prognosis. These can be extremely difficult if not impossible to repair and, especially in the case of neoplasia,
often result in mandibulectomy or maxillectomy. The
underlying cause of any pathologic fracture must be
investigated and addressed prior to attempting fixation. Stabilization or fixation of fractures caused by
neoplastic processes should not be attempted; mandibulectomy, maxillectomy, radiation, and/or chemotherapy may be appropriate in such situations. Consultation
with a veterinary dentist, surgeon, and/or oncologist is
recommended.

26/04/16 1:44 am

96

Diseases of specific organ systems

ORAL MASSES AND NEOPLASIA
Definition/overview
Oral masses are quite common in dogs and cats. In fact,
the oral cavity is the fourth most common location for a
tumor/neoplasm in the body in both canine and feline
patients. Oral masses may be either benign or malignant.
Like masses elsewhere, gross examination is generally
insufficient for accurate diagnosis. All oral masses, no
matter how small, should be biopsied and evaluated histopathologically. While most oral masses are benign, aggressive neoplasms are fairly common in the oral cavity.

Etiology
Oral tumors may be odontogenic or nonodontogenic, but
a true etiology is unknown in most cases. An exception
is canine squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), which is frequently associated with papillomavirus.

Clinical presentation
Presentation is variable depending on the type of tumor.
Many masses are found incidentally during routine oral
examination. Others may be erosive or ulcerated and secondarily infected or inflamed, causing discomfort, dysphagia, halitosis, or ptyalism.

Differential diagnosis
Gingival hyperplasia (enlargement), granuloma, dentigerous cyst, abscess, eosinophilic granuloma.

Diagnosis
Intraoral dental radiographs and histopathology are
required for accurate diagnosis of any oral mass. Palpable
lymph nodes should be aspirated or excised in cases of
malignant neoplasia. If cytopathology or histopathology is consistent with malignancy, standard clinical
staging should be performed, including 3-view thoracic
radiography, CBC, chemistry panel, urinalysis, +/- abdominal ultrasound.

Management
In general, surgical excision is the treatment of choice,
with required margins (see below) and ­follow-up chemotherapy or radiation treatment dependent on histopa­
thologic diagnosis.

Prognosis
Prognosis for benign tumors is excellent with adequate
surgical resection. Malignant oral tumors may have a
good prognosis if diagnosed and definitively treated
very early. Advanced malignancies carry a poor to grave

K22463_C003.indd 96

prognosis even with radical surgical excision and chemo
or radiation therapy. (Note: Individual tumor types are
discussed below.)

PERIPHERAL ODONTOGENIC FIBROMA/FOCAL
FIBROUS HYPERPLASIA (PREVIOUSLY TERMED
EPULIS)
Epulis is not a diagnosis, but a clinical description that
includes neoplasia, fibromas, and odontogenic tumors.
It refers to any swelling of the gingiva. Peripheral odontogenic fibroma is a benign neoplasm, previously classified as fibromatous or ossifying epulis. These are slow
growing and usually found around maxillary premolars.
They exhibit no evidence of bony involvement on radiographs but may show mineralized areas. The majority
of gingival growths are histopathologically focal fibrous
hyperplasia, frequently seen in Boxers. Marginal surgical
excision of the tumor is generally curative.

ACANTHOMATOUS AMELOBLASTOMA
Previously known as acanthomatous epulis, these
masses are now termed canine or peripheral acanthomatous ameloblastoma (Figure 3.24). They most often
occur around the incisors in large breed dogs and are
fleshy and proliferative masses. These tumors are locally
aggressive but do not metastasize. Radiographs typically
reveal local bone infiltration and tooth displacement.
Since local recurrence with marginal excision is common,
wide (0.5–1 cm of normal tissue) surgical excision is recommended. Another treatment option is radiation therapy, which has a 90% control rate.

PAPILLOMATOSIS
These are generally pedunculated or cauliflower-like in
appearance and white, gray, or flesh colored. Further, their
appearance is benign mucosal thickening with fi
­ nger-like
projections. They may be solitary or ­multiple. They are
of viral origin (papillomavirus), with a 2–6-month incubation, and are spread usually through direct, but sometimes indirect, contact. Generally self-limiting, they
resolve in weeks to months and the patient is generally
immune in the future. They are only cause for concern if
they are large enough to interfere with mastication, are
infected, or inflamed. They can mimic more aggressive
tumors and there are reports of transformation to SCC.
No treatment is usually recommended; however, atypical
appearance, failure to regress in the expected time period,
and infection all are indications for excisional biopsy and

26/04/16 1:44 am

Diseases of the oral cavity and teeth

3.24

97

3.25

Figure 3.25 Malignant melanoma affecting the left maxillary
4th premolar and molar teeth of a dog. Note the irregular,
­pigmented appearance. These are highly aggressive tumors
that may or may not be pigmented.

Figure 3.24 Acanthomatous ameloblastoma associated with
the maxillary left 3rd incisor (203) and affecting the second
incisor (202) and canine tooth (204).

histopathology. Removal may also be indicated if they
are large enough to interfere with mastication. Excision
may be accomplished with standard sharp excision, cryosurgery, electrocautery, or laser surgery. Vaccination,
traumatic crushing, and chemotherapy have also been
utilized, but are generally no longer recommended.

ORAL MALIGNANT MELANOMA
Oral malignant melanoma (OMM) (Figure 3.25) is the
most common malignant oral cavity tumor in dogs. They
may be pigmented or amelanotic and are highly aggressive, with early metastasis to lymph nodes (less frequently to lungs and other organs). Palpable lymph nodes
should be aspirated or excised at the time of diagnosis.
Standard clinical staging after confirmatory cytopathologic or histopathologic diagnosis (3-view thoracic radiographs, CBC, chemistry panel, urinalysis, +/- abdominal
ultrasound) should be performed prior to wide surgical
excision (2–3 cm normal tissue). Follow-up chemotherapy, immunotherapy, or radiation therapy may also be

K22463_C003.indd 97

indicated, as distant dissemination of disease is c­ ommon,
as is local recurrence. If complete resection is not possible, radiation therapy should be considered as a primary
treatment. Prognosis is generally poor, but a fair to good
response may be achieved with early diagnosis and
aggressive treatment and follow up.

FIBROSARCOMA
This is a malignant mesenchymal tumor, most often
seen in young (4–5-year-old) large breed dogs and
older (~8-year-old) small breed dogs. Fibrosarcomas are
locally invasive with a high postsurgical recurrence rate.
Prognosis is variable, depending on location, size, grade,
and stage at time of diagnosis. The maxilla is the most
common site. This tumor can present as an innocuous,
lobulated, sessile mass or, alternatively, as a rapidly
growing, hemorrhagic, ulcerated lesion. They are often
noted at dental margins and the palate, but may also
originate from nasal cartilages and the lateral surface of
the maxilla or palate. Well-differentiated masses are best
treated with wide surgical excision (2 cm margin). Poorly
differentiated tumors require radical excision and postoperative radiation treatment.
A subcategory of fibrosarcoma, termed histologically
low-grade, biologically high-grade, is most common in
large breed dogs, particularly Golden Retrievers. These
tumors are characterized by rapid growth, bony invasion, and high metastatic potential. Treatment for these
tumors has not yet been optimized and local recurrence
is very common.

26/04/16 1:44 am

98

Diseases of specific organ systems

SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA
SCC (Figure 3.26) is the most common oral neoplasm in
cats and the second most common in dogs. These are
large, locally aggressive tumors that exhibit lymph node
and lung metastasis late in the course of disease. Feline
maxillary and lingual SCC carries a poor prognosis, mandibular tumors a somewhat better prognosis, and rostral
mandibular locations a fair prognosis. Cure is possible with very early lesions and wide surgical excisions.
Papillomavirus DNA has been frequently associated with
canine oral SCC. These are erosive, fleshy lesions and with
local bony invasion dental displacement may occur. There
may be chronic, nonhealing ulcers of the associated skin.
Wide surgical excision (2 cm) is recommended, including glossectomy for dogs with lingual tumors. Radiation
treatment may be considered for local control or palliation, but is fairly ineffective in cats. Chemotherapy is also
an option for microscopic disease.

3.26

Figure 3.26 Squamous cell sarcoma in the left maxilla
of a cat.
3.27

OSTEOSARCOMA
Osteosarcoma (OSA) may occur in either the mandible
or maxilla. It is much less common in cats than in dogs.
These tumors are locally aggressive, but have less metastatic potential than appendicular OSA. Mandibular OSA
carries a more favorable prognosis than maxillary, with
a reported median survival time of 7 months, whereas
the median survival of maxillary OSA is 5 months. It
may be identified as a fleshy expansile mass that may or
may not be ulcerative in the early stages. The significant
tissue destruction and locally aggressive bony swelling
frequently lead to subsequent facial swelling and may be
associated with pain and discomfort on opening or closing the mouth. Wide or radical surgical excision is recommended depending on stage, and radiation treatment
should be considered for microscopic disease.

TOOTH RESORPTION
Definition/overview
Previously called neck lesions, cervical line lesions,
feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions, and several other
names, these lesions are currently referred to as tooth
resorptions (TRs). They represent noncarious odontoclastic destruction of teeth. There are two types of feline TR:
type 1 and type 2. Type 1 resorptions do not result in the
replacement of roots by bone (Figure 3.27) while in type 2
resorptions, the lost root structure is replaced by bone
(Figure 3.28). An individual tooth may exhibit both type
1 and type 2 resorption, and is then classified as type 3.

K22463_C003.indd 98

Figure 3.27 Radiograph of the right mandible of a cat,
demonstrating type 1 tooth resorption in all three teeth. Note
the varying degrees of lucency, most obvious in the molar
tooth (409). Complete extraction of crowns and all roots is the
recommended treatment.

TR typically begins externally, and may occur in the
crowns, roots, or both (see Table 3.2 for AVDC classification). TR occurs in dogs and humans, but is most commonly seen in cats and may represent different disease
processes or etiologies in the different species. (Note:
Internal resorption can also occur, but is rare and more
common in dogs than cats.)

Etiology
Although there are several theories, the cause of tooth
resorption remains unknown. Different theories have
suggested either excess levels of dietary vitamin D or
that feline teeth were not developed to masticate hard,
dry kibble diets, leading to abfraction injuries (see below).
Type 1 TRs in cats are more commonly associated with oral

26/04/16 1:44 am

Diseases of the oral cavity and teeth

3.28

99

inflammation (gingivitis, periodontitis, or ­stomatitis) than
are type 2, but no clear cause and effect has been shown.
Type 2 TRs are not as commonly associated with ­significant
oral i­nflammation, but the lesion itself may create mild
­gingivitis. Neither form of TR has been shown to be related
to the retroviral status of cats. In humans, abfraction (­ lateral
forces that result in microflexure of the crown of the tooth)
is a proposed cause of TR and although not proven, this
could also be a cause of TR in cats and other species.

Pathophysiology

Figure 3.28 Type 2 tooth resorption in the right mandibular
3rd premolar of a cat. Note the lack of a visible periodontal
ligament and how the roots have an appearance similar to that
of the surrounding bone.

As stated above, type 1 TRs are typically associated with
oral inflammation, especially in younger cats. There is
an increasing likelihood for developing TRs (especially
type 2) with age. Odontoclastic destruction of cementum
usually begins in the apical third of the root and generally extends into dentin. The dentinal destruction may
eventually extend under the enamel and undermine it,
at which point the enamel flakes off exposing the underlying dentin. This creates a significantly painful area of
exposed tooth structure. Clinically, they are generally
first noticed in the area of the cementoenamel junction.
The tooth structure is damaged and eventually weakened
to a point at which the crown of the tooth fractures, leaving roots behind. In type 1 lesions these roots have intact
endodontic systems and can create pain and/or infection, whereas in type 2 lesions the roots have partially or
completely been replaced by bone. In cases of complete
replacement by bone, they are known as ‘ghost roots’.

Table 3.2 American Veterinary Dental College Tooth Resorption Classification.
Tooth resorptions are classified by radiographic type as well as stage of resorption:
•• Type 1. Focal or multifocal radiolucency is present in the tooth with otherwise normal radiopacity and normal periodontal
­ligament space.
•• Type 2. Radiographic narrowing or disappearance of the periodontal ligament space in at least some areas and decreased
radiopacity of part of the tooth.
•• Type 3. Radiographic features of both type 1 and type 2 are present in the same tooth. A tooth with this appearance has
areas of normal and narrow or lost periodontal ligament space, and there is focal or multifocal radiolucency in the tooth and
decreased radiopacity in other areas of the tooth.
•• Stage 1. Mild dental hard tissue loss (cementum or cementum and enamel).
•• Stage 2. Moderate dental hard tissue loss (cementum or cementum and enamel with loss of dentin that does not extend to the
pulp cavity).
•• Stage 3. Deep dental hard tissue loss (cementum or cementum and enamel with loss of dentin that extends to the pulp cavity);
most of the tooth retains its integrity.
•• Stage 4. Extensive dental hard tissue loss (cementum or cementum and enamel with loss of dentin that extends to the pulp
cavity); most of the tooth has lost its integrity:
○○ Stage 4a. Crown and root are equally affected.
○○ Stage 4b. Crown is more severely affected than the root.
○○ Stage 4c. Root is more severely affected than the crown.
•• Stage 5. Remnants of dental hard tissue are visible only as irregular radiopacities and gingival covering is complete.

K22463_C003.indd 99

26/04/16 1:44 am

100

Diseases of specific organ systems

It is possible that type 1 TRs are an early form of type 2
and that some type 1 lesions may progress to type 2
­resorptions. However, the exact cause of TR is unknown
at this time. In cats, it has also been proposed that type 2
lesions commonly seen in their canine teeth may not
be related to inflammation, but rather to ankylosis and
age-related bone replacement.

3.29

Clinical presentation
Type 1 lesions are often, but not always, accompanied by
oral inflammation (gingivitis, stomatitis, and/or periodontal disease). In both type 1 and type 2 resorptions
there is often an associated area of gingival enlargement, which may or may not be inflamed, that covers or fills the lacuna that results from the resorption
(Figures 3.29, 3.30). Cats typically show no clinical signs
even with advanced lesions, but they rarely may exhibit
pain, dysphagia, decreased appetite, halitosis, depression, or other signs. (Note: One author [ER] has treated
a cat whose only clinical sign was inappropriate urination that resolved with definitive treatment of the TR.)
The mandibular 3rd premolars are often the first teeth
affected, but TRs can occur in any tooth. Cats with one/
any TR are at increased risk for developing future
lesions. Dogs may present for pain or suspected tooth
fracture or ­resorptions, but typically TRs are incidental
findings during routine dental prophylaxis or intraoral
radiographs.

Figure 3.29 Tooth resorption of the left maxillary 3rd premolar
(207) in a cat. Although the mandibular 3rd premolar is the
most common location for tooth resorptions, they may occur
in any tooth.
3.30

Differential diagnosis
Gingivitis or periodontitis (without resorption), bone
loss/furcation exposure in multirooted teeth, gingival
hyperplasia or mass, fractured tooth, caries.

Diagnosis
Visual examination and subgingival exploration are
often sufficient for identifying a clinical TR. However,
intraoral radiography is essential for proper classification of the type and stage of the lesion and appropriate
therapy planning, as well as finding incipient subgingival lesions.

Management
Extraction is the treatment of choice for TR. Crown amputation is only appropriate for type 2 lesions under the following conditions:

●● No evidence of caudal stomatitis.
●● No clinical or radiographic evidence of periodontal
disease in the area of the root to be left.

K22463_C003.indd 100

Figure 3.30 Tooth resorption in the left mandibular canine
tooth (304) of a cat.

●● No identifiable tooth root structure, periodontal
­ligament, or root canal.

●● There must be no evidence of endodontic disease.
If any of these criteria are not met, complete extraction
is required. This may be very difficult due to root ankylosis. Radiographs must be obtained prior to and following extraction or crown amputation. Resorption that
is completely subgingival and does not extend into the
oral cavity may be monitored if there is no evidence of
periodontal or endodontic disease, no stomatitis, and the
patient is not showing clinical signs of pain, dysphagia,
or inappetence. While there are no studies to this effect,
crown amputation may be recommended for extremely
advanced cases of TR in dogs. However, if at all possible,

26/04/16 1:44 am

Diseases of the oral cavity and teeth

teeth and roots should be removed completely and complete extraction verified radiographically.

Prognosis
With appropriate diagnosis and treatment prognosis is
good. However, animals with a single TR lesion are at
greater risk of developing lesions in other teeth. Some
cats require full or near full mouth extractions to alleviate their discomfort.

FELINE CAUDAL STOMATITIS
Definition/overview
Stomatitis refers to inflammation and proliferation of the
oral mucosa, while gingivitis more specifically refers to
inflammation and proliferation of the gingival tissues.
Gingivostomatitis is a clinical descriptive term, while
lymphoplasmacytic stomatitis is the histopathologic
diagnosis most commonly associated with this condition.
It may range from mild to severe and generally increases
with chronicity. The current terminology for this condition is caudal stomatitis, which is when the inflammation
extends to the caudal oral tissues (caudal mucositis).

Etiology

101

than healthy cats. It has been proposed that the decreased
salivary IgA in affected cats may have a contributing role
in the development of chronic caudal stomatitis.

Clinical presentation
It is not uncommon for affected cats to present for anorexia
(complete or partial), dysphagia, pain, and ptyalism. They
may also exhibit halitosis, pawing at the mouth, weight
loss, vocalization, and an unkempt appearance due to
lack of grooming (Figure 3.31). Paws and perioral areas
may be stained with saliva, blood, and/or purulent material. Affected cats may have undergone behavior changes,
becoming either more aggressive or more withdrawn
than usual. Chronic caudal stomatitis is the oral disease
most likely to result in anorexia. These patients are often
extremely painful and oral examination may prove very
difficult, as opening the mouth can cause great discomfort. If oral examination is possible, the practitioner may
note varying amounts of tissue inflammation, ulceration,
and proliferation. The key clinical sign that differentiates this condition from periodontal disease is the caudal
location of the stomatitis (Figure 3.32).
3.31

The cause of caudal stomatitis is unknown, and is possibly multifactorial. Suggested inciting causes or cofactors
include an exaggerated inflammatory response to plaque,
viral infection (particularly calicivirus), Bartonella henselae infection, and altered immune status.

Pathophysiology
Feline calicivirus (FCV) has been isolated from cats
with caudal stomatitis and cats exhibiting signs of the
disease are more likely to be shedding FCV and feline
­herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) from the oral mucosa. However,
there is no evidence that FCV causes caudal stomatitis.
Additional research is being done to more fully understand the role of FCV in chronic caudal stomatitis. Neither
are FIV and FeLV implicated directly in cases of caudal
stomatitis, but infection with either virus may contribute
to its development in individual cats. While cats that are
positive for FIV and B. henselae exhibit increased levels
of mandibular lymphadenopathy and gingivitis compared with noninfected cats, B. henselae is not currently
believed to be a significant contributing factor in caudal
stomatitis. An exaggerated response to bacterial plaque
has been speculated to play a role in this disease, as cats
with chronic caudal stomatitis exhibit significantly lower
salivary IgA and higher serum IgA, IgG, and IgM levels

K22463_C003.indd 101

Figure 3.31 A cat with caudal stomatitis. Note the excessive
ptyalism and unkempt coat.

26/04/16 1:44 am

102

Diseases of specific organ systems

3.32

the canine and incisor teeth should also be considered,
especially if the inflammation extends to the gingiva
covering them. Aggressive management of periodontal
disease is vital to treatment success. Some veterinary
dentists are advocating CO2 laser ablation of proliferative tissues following caudal mouth extractions; however,
there is minimal research to support this procedure at
this time. Patients may require some medical therapy
with steroids or NSAIDs during the course of treatment,
but these drugs are not a replacement for aggressive
tooth extractions. Esterified fatty acid complex supplements have also shown some promise.

Prognosis
Figure 3.32 Caudal stomatitis in a cat. The severe erythema
and inflammation in this area is pathognomic for this condition.

Differential diagnosis
Neoplasia (especially SCC), periodontal disease, eosinophilic granuloma complex (EGC), autoimmune disease,
foreign body mucosal entrapment.

Diagnosis
As described above, caudal stomatitis represents a clinical syndrome rather than a specific etiology or diagnosis.
Therefore, diagnosis of caudal stomatitis is primarily a
clinical one, based on visual identification and testing
for underlying contributing factors. A thorough visual
examination under anesthesia, as well as dental radiographs to identify any retained root tips, periodontal
disease, or any bony changes consistent with neoplasia,
is crucial. In addition, CBC and blood chemistry screening, including retroviral testing for FeLV and FIV status,
are all indicated. Hyperglobulinemia may be present
as a result of chronic antigenic stimulation. Testing for
FCV and B. henselae may also be considered, but is not
generally recommended. In addition, biopsies for histopathology should be collected if there is asymmetry in
inflammation or ulceration, a nonclassical appearance
to the inflammation, or if radiographs are suspicious for
neoplasia.

Management
The goal of treatment is complete resolution of the oral
inflammation. It has now been fairly well established that
prolonged medical treatment with extensive or chronic
use of steroids or NSAIDs results in poorer long-term
responses than when early, aggressive surgical treatment
is performed. Many if not most cats will respond best if
all teeth and tooth remnants caudal to the canines are
removed early in the course of the disease. Extraction of

K22463_C003.indd 102

Extraction of all teeth and tooth remnants caudal to the
canines (or full mouth extractions if canine and incisor
teeth are clinically abnormal) results in improvement in
approximately 80% of affected cats. Of these, about 20%
still show some signs of inflammation, but do not appear
to be in pain. The remaining 20% require additional care,
which may include laser or surgical ablation, interferon
therapy (used often in Europe, but not widely available in
the USA), or medical therapy (typically cyclosporine, but
also possibly steroids, NSAIDs, or fatty acid supplementation [1-TDC]). (Key point: Early tooth extractions are
indicated. Prolonged, repeated use of steroids not only
has many undesirable side-effects, it also decreases the
likelihood of resolution and worsens outcomes.)

EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA COMPLEX
Definition/overview
EGC is, as the name suggests, a group of conditions that
share a common etiology and some histopathological features. Seen most frequently in cats, EGC can also occur in
dogs (Cavalier King Charles Spaniels, Siberian Huskies,
and Malamutes in particular).

Etiology
The true etiology remains unknown, but it is suspected to
be a hypersensitivity or immune-mediated reaction. Most
likely EGC occurs in response to flea and/or food allergy
or atopy. However, it should be noted that lesions have
also been found in cases where infectious and allergic
diseases have been essentially ruled out. Finally, there
may be a genetic predisposition to EGC.

Pathophysiology
Inflammation and necrosis are seen and thought to be
the result of the inflammatory agents released by accumulations of eosinophils in the lesions.

26/04/16 1:44 am

Diseases of the oral cavity and teeth

Clinical presentation
The most common presentation is an indolent or rodent
ulcer seen as a reddish brown lesion at the philtrum or
around the maxillary canine teeth (Figure 3.33). Indolent
ulcers may be uni- or bilateral, and females appear to be
overrepresented. Linear granulomas (Figure 3.34) are
the second most common presentation and may be single
or multiple. They are typically found on the lips, tongue,
gingiva, and palate, but can occur in any location in the
mouth. These granulomas are yellow–pink, lobulated,
raised masses and are generally nonpainful, although
they may become secondarily infected and/or ulcerated.
Occasionally, they can severely damage oral mucosa and
even bone. There are reported cases of severe periodontal
disease, oronasal fistulas, and even pathologic fractures
as a result of eosinophilic granulomas. These lesions
should not be taken lightly and should be on the differential list for any aggressive appearing oral lesion. Another
manifestation of EGC is the collagenolytic granuloma, a
firmly swollen rostral mandibular lip lesion most commonly seen in young female cats. Eosinophilic plaques
may also be found (rarely) in the oral cavity, where they
appear much like a linear granuloma. These are more
commonly seen as a dermatologic lesion. In fact, oral EGC
very often occurs concurrently with dermatologic manifestations of the syndrome.

103

3.33

Figure 3.33 Typical ‘rodent ulcer’. This lesion is pathognomonic
for eosinophilic granuloma complex in a cat.
3.34

Differential diagnosis
Neoplasia; gingival hyperplasia; uremic stomatitis;
immune-mediated disease; trauma; periodontal disease;
thermal, electric and chemical burns; foreign body mucosal entrapment.

Diagnosis
A minimum data base (CBC, biochemical profile, urinaly­
sis) should be obtained to rule out underlying disease.
Histopathology should be performed to confirm the diagnosis. A thorough allergy evaluation (diet trial, serum, or
intradermal testing) should be performed on histologic
confirmation.

Management
Treatment is directed at the underlying cause of the disease, generally by controlling allergies. This may include
strict flea control, hypoallergenic diets, and short-term
(for acute control) steroids, but most often long-term
medical management is with cyclosporine or corticosteroids. Cyclosporine has proven effective for therapy
of oral eosinophilic diseases and a veterinary product
is approved for use in dogs and cats for allergic disease. Weaning to the lowest effective dose at the longest

K22463_C003.indd 103

Figure 3.34 Palatal linear granuloma associated with
eosinophilic granuloma complex. A rodent ulcer is also visible at
the rostral maxillary lip. This is the same cat as in Figure 3.33.

interval that provides patient relief and disease control
is recommended. Surgical removal has been occasionally successful, including cryosurgery and laser surgery.
Finally, radiation therapy has been used in some cases.

26/04/16 1:44 am

104

Diseases of specific organ systems

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Bellows J (2010) Feline Dentistry: Oral Assessment, Treatment, and
Preventative Care. Wiley-Blackwell, Ames.
Niemiec BA (2010) Small Animal Dental, Oral and Maxillofacial
Disease: A Colour Handbook. Manson Publishing, London.
Niemiec BA (2010) Veterinary Endodontics. Practical Veterinary
Publishing, Tustin.

K22463_C003.indd 104

Niemiec BA (2012) Veterinary Orthodontics. Practical Veterinary
Publishing, Tustin.
Niemiec BA (2013) Veterinary Periodontology. Wiley-Blackwell,
Ames.
Niemiec BA (2014) Veterinary Restorative Dentistry for the
General Practitioner. Practical Veterinary Publishing, Tustin.
Verstraete FJ (2012) Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery in Dogs and
Cats. Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis.

26/04/16 1:44 am

105

Chapter 4
Respiratory disorders
Cécile Clercx

INTRODUCTION
Respiratory diseases are common clinical problems in
small animal practice. Some are readily diagnosed on the
basis of history and clinical signs while others can prove
difficult to diagnose. Upper airways generally refer to
the nasal cavities and frontal sinuses, naso- and laryngopharynx, larynx, and extrathoracic trachea, while lower
airways include organs inside the thoracic cage, including (1) the intrathoracic part of the trachea, the airways
or ‘conducting pipes’ (i.e. the bronchi and bronchioli) and
(2) the lung parenchyma, composed of functional units
(i.e. the alveoli, surrounded by capillaries, where gas
exchange takes place, and interstitial tissue). Pleural disorders, and diseases involving other intrathoracic organs,
such as the heart and vessels, and mediastinal organs
will cause clinical signs similar to those encountered in
parenchymal diseases.
Clinical history is of great importance since a good
description of the complaints can help determine the segment of the respiratory tree involved. A physical examination is essential and will often be very helpful in the
diagnosis of upper airway diseases, while in respiratory
diseases of intrathoracic origin, diagnosis is much more
challenging and several ancillary diagnostic tests, mainly
imaging, will always be needed.
The clinical signs encountered in disorders of the different affected areas are summarized in Table 4.1.

UPPER AIRWAY DISORDERS
NASAL, SINUS, AND/OR NASOPHARYNGEAL
DISORDERS
Nasal, sinus, and/or nasopharyngeal diseases will be presented together since differentiation, based on clinical signs
alone, is challenging and because in most diseases all three
regions can be involved. Although the clinical signs (e.g.
sneezing, discharge, reverse sneezing, stertor) localize the
disease to this area, confirmation of the e­ tiology depends on
additional diagnostic tests, primarily imaging (mainly CT)

K22463_C004.indd 105

and rhinoscopy (direct and retrograde). Direct rhinoscopy
can be performed using a rigid scope (Figures 4.1a. b), but
investigation of the frontal sinus and nasopharynx usually
requires a flexible endoscope (Figures 4.2a, b). These procedures require general anesthesia. When CT is indicated, it
should precede rhinoscopy, if performed during the same
anesthetic procedure. During rhinoscopy, other procedures,
such as brushing, biopsies, nasal lavage, and sampling for
microbiologic examination, can be performed.
Disorders of the nasal cavities must be differentiated
from nasal planum (planum nasale) disorders. Indeed,
some disorders of the nasal cavities induce changes on
the nasal planum (e.g. hyperkeratosis, erosions, and ulcerations, together with local oozing or bleeding) that can be
confused with nasal discharge. However, diseases of the
nasal cavities are often accompanied by sneezing and discharge coming from inside the nasal cavity. These include
skin or mucocutaneous junction disorders (e.g. tumors,
immune-mediated diseases, or leishmaniasis), which can
be associated with coagulopathy in addition to being associated with epistaxis unrelated to coagulopathy. In these
cases, a full clinical examination must be performed before
considering other diagnostic procedures such as rhinoscopy, nasal/ sinus radiographs, or CT under anesthesia.
Stenosis of the nares (Figure 4.3) causes a decrease in
the intranasal opening, resulting in a stertorous breathing during normal attempts to breathe. This pathology is
encountered mainly in brachycephalic breeds of dogs and
is often associated with the clinical signs reported in dogs
with brachycephalic airway obstructive syndrome (BAOS)
(see below). If stenosis of the nares is encountered alone,
which is uncommon, the noisy ­respiration can be associated with some degree of serous nasal discharge.

Mycotic rhinosinusitis (dogs)
Definition/overview
Sinonasal aspergillosis (SNA) is a common disease and
affects between 12% and 34% of dogs evaluated for chronic
sinonasal disease. The term ‘nasal aspergillosis’, which was
used in the past to describe this condition, is better replaced

26/04/16 12:35 am

106

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 4.1 Clinical signs in respiratory tract diseases.
Major signs

Less common signs

Nasal cavities, sinuses, nasopharynx

Sneezing
Nasal discharge
Reverse sneezing
Alterations of the nasal plane
Change in nostril patency
Stertor

Facial deformity (tumor)
Systemic signs of illness (aspergillosis)
(e.g. lethargy, inappetence, weight loss)
Seizures

Pharynx

Stertor
Open-mouth breathing
Sneezing, nasal discharge
Cough

Upper digestive symptoms
Gagging, retching
Dysphagia
Ptyalism

Larynx

Exercise intolerance
Stridor
Difficult breathing/respiratory distress
Cough
Hypoxemia/cyanosis

Modified barking sounds
Gagging or coughing with eating

Extrathoracic trachea

Cough (mainly in dogs, not in cats)
Stridor (mainly in cats)
Retching, gagging

Exercise intolerance
Dyspnea (when severe obstruction)

Intrathoracic trachea

Cough (mainly in dogs, not in cats)
Stridor
Gagging

Exercise intolerance
Difficult breathing (when severe
obstruction)

Bronchi

Cough
Dyspnea

Exercise intolerance
Systemic signs of illness

Pulmonary parenchyma

Exercise intolerance
Tachypnea
Dyspnea (obstructive or restrictive)

Systemic signs of illness (depending on
the cause)
Hypoxemia

Pleural space

Exercise intolerance
Orthopnea
Dyspnea

Varies with cause

Mediastinal

Exercise intolerance
Orthopnea
Dyspnea

Cough
Digestive signs

Upper airway disorders

Lower airway disorders

by the term ‘sinonasal’ aspergillosis, since the infection
involves the nasal cavity and frontal sinus in most cases.
Aspergillosis in dogs typically causes destructive rhinitis
and sinusitis. Most affected dogs are young to middle aged
and of mesencephalic and dolichocephalic breeds.

K22463_C004.indd 106

Etiology
In most instances, Aspergillus fumigatus is the e­ tiologic
agent but A. niger, A. nidulans, A. flavus, as well as
Penicillium spp. may also be involved. A. fumigatus is a
filamentous saprophyte and ubiquitous fungus.

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

4.1

a

107

4.2

a

b
Figures 4.1a, b Direct rhinoscopy. (a) Use of a rigid scope in
a Persian cat. (b) Rhinoscopic view of the turbinates in a dog.

Pathophysiology
Despite numerous investigations, the pathogenesis is, to
date, poorly understood. As the disease usually affects
systemically healthy dogs, and as A. fumigatus is a ubiquitous fungus, a local immune deficiency in affected dogs
has been suggested. The fungus invades the nasal cavity
and sinus and causes necrosis of the turbinates, which is
painful. The fungus can also induce lysis of the medial
septum and invade the contralateral nasal cavity/sinus,
or cause lysis of the cribriform plate.

b
Figures 4.2a, b Retrograde rhinoscopy. (a) Diagram showing
the use of a flexible endoscope. (b) Normal aspect of the
choanae in a dog.

●● Signs of nasal and frontal sinus pain, as evidenced

●● Profuse nasal discharge, unilateral when the disease

by restriction of head movements, lethargy, and
decreased appetite.
●● Hyperkeratosis of the planum nasale and ulceration
of external nares (Figure 4.4).
●● Increased nasal airflow, as shown by placing a thin
piece of cotton wool in front of each nostril alternately, related to the destruction of the turbinates
(this abnormality is easily demonstrated from early
in the course of the disease).
●● Enlarged mandibulary lymph node(s), probably
related to secondary bacterial infection of the nasal
cavities and/or frontal sinus.

begins, then possibly bilateral when the disease progresses, due to septal erosion. The discharge can be
mucopurulent, although more often it is sanguinopurulent or bloody.
●● Sneezing and reverse sneezing.

In advanced cases, other clinical abnormalities that
can occur include facial deformity due to frontal bone
hyperostosis, epiphora secondary to extension of the
pathologic process into the orbit, or signs of forebrain

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs associated with the disease include, in
decreasing frequency:

K22463_C004.indd 107

26/04/16 12:35 am

108

Diseases of specific organ systems

4.3

Figure 4.3 Stenotic nares in a French Bulldog.

4.4

Figure 4.4 Ulceration of the external nares, hyperkeratosis and
discharge in a dog with sinonasal aspergillosis.

dysfunction (e.g. seizures, dullness) if there is cribriform
plate destruction.

Differential diagnosis
Includes lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis, early nasal tumor,
chronic nasal foreign body, bacterial rhinitis due to dental disease, and fungal rhinitis.

Diagnosis
SNA may be suspected based on signalment, history, and
clinical signs but reaching a definitive diagnosis remains
a clinical challenge. Medical imaging (CT or MRI), endoscopy, cytology/histology, fungal culture, serology, and
fungal DNA quantification have been reported to help in
the diagnosis of canine SNA. However, there is no single
consistently reliable diagnostic method as false-positive

K22463_C004.indd 108

and false-negative results can occur with each test. Direct
rhinoscopy may detect turbinate lysis in the affected
­cavity(ies) in addition to any fungal plaques with their
associated accumulation of necrotic material in the
affected cavity (Figure 4.5). In early cases, rhinoscopy
may not detect the presence of typical fungal colonies
because the plaques might not yet be formed.
Radiographic signs of fungal rhinitis consist of a loss
of the normal intranasal trabecular pattern together with
an increased lucency of the affected nasal cavity(ies).
High-resolution CT is much more useful. Typical features
of nasal aspergillosis include cavitary destruction of the
turbinates with abnormal soft tissue within the nasal
cavity, a rim of soft tissue along the frontal and sinus
bones, and thick reactive bone (Figure 4.6). The value of
MRI for the diagnosis of aspergillosis is very similar to
that provided by CT because of the greater detail they
provide compared with radiography.
Rhinoscopy is required for a definitive diagnosis because
it is the only technique that is able to show the presence
(active overt aspergillosis) or absence of fungal colonies. It
also allows access to the plaques for surgical debridement.
Direct endoscopic visualization of fungal plaques, along
with biopsy of the pathologic tissue, have become accepted
as the gold standard for the diagnosis of SNA. Referral of
suspect patients to veterinary centers that have the diagnostic expertise can be a great service for practices that are
not equipped for such diagnostic testing.
Agar gel double immunodiffusion (AGDD) is the most
commonly used serologic test for diagnosing SNA. This
method is cheap, simple, and easy to perform. Although
fungal culture of nasal specimens is highly specific for
the diagnosis of SNA, nasal secretions sampled blindly
with swabs are an unreliable source for fungal culture in
contrast to fungal plaque and mucosal biopsy samples.
Incubating samples for fungal culture at 98.6°F (37°C)
improves the chance of fungal isolation in the laboratory.
Rarely, hyphae or conidia can be seen on cytologic or
histopathologic preparations.

Management
Effective treatment of SNA in dogs is very challenging.
Treatment options include systemic oral therapy, topical antimycotic therapy, and more invasive surgical procedures. The reported success rates and short-term and
long-term outcome are variable.
Systemic oral treatments (ketoconazole, 5 mg/kg
q12h or itraconazole 5 mg/kg q12h) are noninvasive but
require prolonged administration (more than 4 weeks
in all cases) because of poor efficacy and may have
­significant side-effects, especially on liver function.

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

4.5

109

4.6

a
a

b

b

c

c
Figures 4.5a–c Rhinoscopy in a dog with SNA showing (a)
important turbinate lysis and presence of necrotic material
in the nasal cavity; (b) presence of typical fungal plaques and
collection of necrotic material in the nasal cavity; and (c) a
cleaned frontal sinus after debridement.

K22463_C004.indd 109

Figures 4.6a–c Transverse high-resolution CT images of a dog
with severe nasal aspergillosis, showing (a) bilateral cavitary
destruction of the turbinates with abnormal fluid/soft tissue
within the nasal cavities and L>R frontal sinuses; (b) thickening
of the mucosa along the inner surface of the bones of the left
frontal sinus and nasal cavities; and (c) thick reactive maxillary,
incisive, nasal, and frontal bones (hyperstosis) as well as lysis of
the maxillary, nasal, and incisive bones, nasal septum, frontal
crest, and cribriform plate. Note the swelling of the dorsal
subcutaneous tissue on the left side. (Courtesy G. Bolen)

26/04/16 12:35 am

110

Diseases of specific organ systems

Currently, the most rewarding therapies include
topical treatments. They have been associated with
­
greater success and have improved the management
of SNA. Various procedures have been developed to
administer medication topically, and these procedures vary in invasiveness and ease of performance.
Extensive débridement prior to infusion is a critical
and essential step. Topical therapy includes mainly
the use of enilconazole and clotrimazole, at a concentration of 1–2%. These methods have shown good efficacy and reach success rates of up to 80–90%. Although
the use of topical agents via noninvasive methods
is well t­olerated and shows a high success rate, these
procedures are time-consuming and require general
­anesthesia. Infusion of 1% clotrimazole cream through
bore holes into the frontal sinus, which acts as a
depot agent to minimize anesthesia time while providing an extended period of drug contact, has been
described.

Prognosis
Despite all these treatment procedures, some dogs remain
refractory to any treatment and the prognosis is then
very poor. The inability to predict first-treatment success
rate is frustrating. Severity of disease, experience of the
treating clinician, and the ability and extent to which
débridement is performed are contributing factors to
treatment response. Recurrence after apparent remission
is not uncommon and has been demonstrated to occur
several years after an initial successfully treated episode
of SNA.

Mycotic rhinosinusitis (cats)
Definition/overview
In contrast to canine SNA, aspergillosis in cats is rare,
but is considered an emerging condition. In cats, upper
respiratory tract (URT) aspergillosis can be divided
into SNA and sino-orbital aspergillosis (SOA), with SOA
being the most common and invasive form. In contrast
to canine SNA, purebred brachycephalic cats, predominantly of Persian or Himalayan breeds, account for
most cases. The disease affects young to middle aged
cats, with evidence of immunocompromise in some
cases, but not in most. Previous viral URT infection or
recurrent antimicrobial therapy might be additional
risk factors.

Etiology
A diverse range of Aspergillus species has been identified
in cats with URT aspergillosis.

K22463_C004.indd 110

Clinical presentation
Feline SNA is characterized by more local signs of chronic
nasal infection (e.g. sneezing, uni- or bilateral serous
to mucopurulent nasal discharge) and, sometimes, epistaxis. Soft tissue masses protruding from the nares and
bone lysis are less frequent abnormalities. SOA probably
represents an extension of SNA to orbital and subcutaneous tissues, caused by more invasive Aspergillus species.
It is characterized by signs of orbital and surrounding
tissue invasion, including unilateral exophthalmos, third
eyelid prolapse, conjunctival hyperemia, and keratitis.
In some cases, a mass in the pterygopalatine fossa or an
ulceration of the hard palate can be seen. The CNS can
also be involved, leading to neurologic signs.

Differential diagnosis
Includes mainly viral upper URT infections, neoplasia
(lymphoma, carcinoma), and severe chronic rhinosinusitis (idiopathic or secondary to polyp, nasopharyngeal
stenosis or atresia, or palatal defect), cryptococcosis, foreign body.

Diagnosis
Confirmation of the diagnosis relies on advanced imaging (CT or MRI) and rhinoscopy. Biopsy or a nasal lavage
specimen can be used for histology, cytology, culture, and
even molecular identification when a negative fungal
culture is ­suspected. In SOA, CT-guided biopsy of orbital
or other paranasal mass lesions can be performed.

Management
Evidence-based treatment protocols are not available.
Only small numbers of reported treated cases exist and
very little follow-up information is available. Successful
treatment regimens have been described using systemic
antifungal therapy alone or with topical intranasal antifungal infusion. As with canine SNA, débridement of fungal lesions appears to be a very important step in any
treatment protocol. To date, optimal treatment regimens
have not been investigated, confirmed, or identified.

Prognosis
SNA carries a favorable prognosis with treatment,
whereas the prognosis for SOA is poor.

Cryptococcosis
Definition/overview
Cryptococcus is a dimorphic fungus that exists in the
yeast form in the animal. In nature it is found in bird
guano. Various species exist (Cryptococcus neoformans

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

var grubii or var neoformans, Cryptococcus gattii) with
­various ­geographic distributions. Cryptococcal infection
is reported much more commonly in cats than in dogs,
and the disease is much less frequent than aspergillosis.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs include facial distortion, sneezing, and
chronic mucopurulent nasal discharge, and can be accompanied by skin lesions, chorioretinitis, or CNS signs such
as seizures.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis involves cytologic identification of the organism in nasal smears, exudates, aspirates, or impression
smears. The organism is characteristic (3–8 microns
round, surrounded by a clear capsule ranging in size
from 10 to 30 microns). There is also a serum latex agglutination test that has shown reliable accuracy in detecting the cryptococcal antigen.

Management/prognosis
Itraconazole (50–100 mg/cat/day) is reportedly efficacious in most cases

Tumors (dogs)
Definition/overview

111

Airflow passage is always decreased or absent when
associated with nasal cavity tumors. Diagnostic imaging
is useful to define the extent of the disease and provide
a presumptive diagnosis. CT is the imaging modality of
choice for diagnosing nasal neoplasia, although radiographs are often adequate. CT is superior for staging and
is required before any surgical and/or radiotherapeutic
treatment is started. MRI is more sensitive for identifying
intracranial involvement.
Rhinoscopy is an important diagnostic procedure
because it allows not only visualization of the mass, but
also the opportunity to take selective biopsies in order to
confirm the diagnosis and determine the histopathologic
type of the tumor.
A number of different techniques have been described
for obtaining cytology or biopsy tissue samples from
the nasal cavity. These include nasal flush, traumatic
core biopsy, and rhinoscopy-assisted biopsy. Retrograde
rhinoscopy allows for visualization of the posterior nasal
cavity (Figure 4.7a). Imprint and/or brush cytology can
be diagnostic for nasal tumors, but deep biopsy and histopathology are recommended, since biopsies that are too
superficial may fail to confirm the neoplastic nature of
the mass. Fine-needle aspiration of the submandibular
lymph node is a simple, inexpensive, minimally invasive
technique that can help detect metastasis.

Nasal and paranasal tumors account for 1–2% of canine
neoplasms. Dolichocephalic breeds and medium to large
breeds of dogs are more often affected. Older dogs are predominantly affected. The tumors are mostly malignant
and include mainly carcinomas, but sarcomas also occur.
Nasal lymphomas are infrequent in dogs, but are not rare
in cats. Benign tumors are very rare. Nasal tumors are
locally invasive; systemic metastasis is infrequent, while
local lymph node involvement can be seen.

Differential diagnosis

Clinical presentation

Management/prognosis

Dogs exhibit chronic nasal discharge, which is at first unilateral and can then become bilateral. The discharge is
serous to mucopurulent and/or hemorrhagic. Epistaxis is
common. Other clinical features include stertor, sneezing,
and reverse sneezing. Ocular discharge, facial deformity,
alteration of the nasal plane, weight loss, and CNS signs
are less frequently encountered.

In dogs, regardless of the chosen therapeutic procedure,
prognosis is poor. Chemotherapy will provide varying
results with nasal lymphoma in dogs and cats, but is not
otherwise recommended with other tumor types.
Surgery alone is ineffective since local recurrence is a
consistent outcome, resulting in survival times comparable to those observed in untreated dogs. However, surgery may be used to achieve cytoreduction, but it must
be associated with other treatment modalities. Radiation
alone or after cytoreductive therapy has been the standard of care for treating nasal tumors. The most common therapy currently used in veterinary medicine is
high-voltage radiotherapy using megavoltage x-ray or

Diagnosis
History and clinical signs lead to a presumptive diagnosis in most cases. A very easy and interesting test is the
airflow passage test, which is measured by placing a thin
piece of cotton wool in front of each nostril alternately.

K22463_C004.indd 111

Includes inflammatory rhinitis, aspergillosis, and intranasal foreign bodies.

Diagnosis
The diagnosis of intranasal neoplasia is complicated by
the difficulty in obtaining a representative biopsy and
many neoplasms are initially diagnosed as inflammatory
disease.

26/04/16 12:35 am

112

Diseases of specific organ systems

4.7

cobalt-60, because this method has reportedly improved
outcomes compared with other treatments.
Various treatments have been used in dogs for nasal
tumors, including cryosurgery, iridium-192 brachytherapy, cisplatin chemotherapy, cyclo-oxygenase inhibitors
(piroxicam), tyrosine kinase inhibitors, and some others,
all without noteworthy improvement.

Tumors (cats)
Overview
Lymphoma in cats normally carries a guarded prognosis;
however, nasal lymphoma is prognostically the best variant, with a good chance of long-term remission and even
a possibility of cure. Response rates to treatment (chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy) average 66–75%,
with reported median survival times of 12–30 months,
even when chemotherapy is delivered intraperitoneally.
The disease is often localized and the cats are often still
eating well and are usually FeLV negative. Negative prognostic factors for nasal lymphoma (Figure 4.7b) include
anorexia, anemia, and involvement of the cribriform
plate as seen with CT.

a

Foreign body
Etiology
Most intranasal foreign bodies are of vegetable origin.
Foreign material can be aspirated into the nasal cavity. It can also be stopped at the entrance of the larynx
or regurgitated from the esophagus and misdirected
toward the nasopharyngeal area where it lodges in the
nasopharynx, above the soft palate, behind the choanae.
Dogs are more commonly affected than cats, and young
animals are more frequently affected than older dogs,
but the d
­ isease can be found in any breed and at any age
(Figure 4.8).

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs are quite suggestive and include sudden
onset of sneezing bouts, nasal pruritus (the animal
rubs his nose against the ground or with his paw), and
a serous nasal discharge, which can become mucopurulent or even bloody with time. When the foreign body
is blocked in the nasopharyngeal area, clinical signs
will occur suddenly, and consist of reverse sneezing,
stertor if the choanal opening is reduced, ptyalism, and
gagging. Later, nasal discharge, sneezing, anorexia, and
halitosis can occur.

K22463_C004.indd 112

b
Figures 4.7a, b (a) Retrograde rhinoscopy in a dog, showing
a nasal tumor invading and obstructing both choanae.
(b) Retrograde rhinoscopy in a cat, showing an enlarged
nasopharyngeal tonsil, infiltrated with a lymphoma.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is confirmed by direct or retrograde rhinoscopy. If performed very early, the nasal foreign body can
sometimes be visualized in the anterior nasal cavity and
retrieved with the help of an otoscope. This approach will
not be feasible if the foreign body has migrated to the
caudal nasal cavity. In this case, a rhinoscope is needed.
For detection and retrieval of nasopharyngeal foreign
bodies, retrograde rhinsocopy is essential.

Management/prognosis
Early removal is advised. No other treatment is
­warranted, unless severe inflammation and/or turbinate
lysis have occurred. In this case, nasal drops containing
antibiotics can be prescribed and given intranasally 3–4
times a day for 1 week. The antibiotics can be given orally
as well.

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

4.8

113

caustic (e.g. passage of acid gastric fluids during regurgitation and vomiting), or traumatic (e.g. foreign body,
surgery) origin.
Choanal atresia is a congenital anomaly that results
from failure in the development of the communication between the posterior nasal cavities and the nasopharynx (i.e. the formation of the choanae). Atresia can
be unilateral or bilateral, partial or total, and bony or
membranous.

Clinical presentation

Figure 4.8 Retrograde rhinoscopy showing a foreign body in
the nasopharynx.

Unless the foreign body has caused chronic m
­ ucosal
inflammatory changes, the prognosis is excellent.
However, nasopharyngeal ulceration can potentially lead
to secondary nasopharyngeal stenosis (see below).

Parasitic rhinitis (‘Nasal mite’)
Etiology
This is a rare disease, associated with the presence of the
nasal mite Pneumonyssoides caninum. This nasal cavity
parasite of dogs has been reported worldwide; however,
details of the parasite’s life cycle remain to be elucidated.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs include daily repeated episodes of reverse
sneezing, sneezing, and mild nasal discharge.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based mainly on clinical signs and rarely
on visualization of the mites during retrograde or direct
rhinoscopy. There is no valid serologic test to confirm the
diagnosis.

Both nasopharyngeal stenosis and choanal atresia lead to
decreased nasal patency (obstruction of airflow through
the nose). Progressive stertor and possibly secondary
nasal discharge are present; sometimes, open-mouth
breathing is observed, with subsequent respiratory discomfort and inappetence.

Diagnosis/management/prognosis
Retrograde rhinoscopy is required for both diagnosis and
treatment.
The best therapeutic approach is balloon dilation of
the stenosis. This gives favorable results for nasopharyngeal stenosis (Figures 4.9a–d), but a less favorable prognosis for choanal atresia.

Nasopharyngeal polyp
Etiology/pathophysiology
Nasopharyngeal polyps usually affect young cats. Their
etiology is unknown. They are made of pedunculated
fibrous inflammatory tissue that originates in the eustachian tube and invades the nasopharyngeal area. The
polyp may also grow into the middle ear and invade the
external auditory tube.

Clinical presentation

Treatment is with milbemycin oxime (0.5–1.0 mg/kg PO
once a week for 3 consecutive weeks). Selamectin (6 mg/
kg SC) or ivermectin (0.2 mg/kg SC or PO, given twice
during 3 weeks) is generally successful as well.

Because they can lead to unilateral or bilateral nasal
obstruction, polyps in the nasopharynx cause stertorous
breathing and inspiratory dyspnea. A chronic serous or
mucopurulent nasal discharge may be present. Polyps in
the middle ear may cause vestibular signs and Horner’s
syndrome. In advanced cases, permanent open-mouth
breathing progressively leads to inappetence and poor
general condition.

Nasopharyngeal stenosis and choanal atresia

Diagnosis, management, and prognosis

Management

Definition/overview
Nasopharyngeal stenosis is acquired and results from
excessive formation of scar tissue in the nasopharynx
secondary to a local inflammatory process of infectious,

K22463_C004.indd 113

The rostral part of the soft palate may be depressed by the
polyp, which can be visualized, under anesthesia, after
rostral retraction of the soft palate. Retrograde ­rhinoscopy
can facilitate polyp visualization in the ­posterior nasal
cavity. Ear canal examination will identify any polyp in

26/04/16 12:35 am

114

Diseases of specific organ systems

4.9

b
a

d

c
Figures 4.9a–d Retrograde rhinoscopy in a cat with left nasopharyngeal stenosis before (a), during (b, c), and after ballooning (d).

this particular location. This is important since surgery,
along with tympanic bulla curettage, is the preferred
treatment option, leading to cure without recurrence.
Radiographic examination of the bullae or high-resolution CT of the skull should be performed if the polyp cannot be visualized on direct examination prior to planning
surgery (Figure 4.10).

K22463_C004.indd 114

Recurrent infectious rhinitis in dogs
Definition/overview
Primary acute rhinitis is rare in dogs. Canine distemper
virus is the only virus able to induce rhinitis in dogs and
is always accompanied by other, more severe, clinical
signs.

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

4.10

115

become infected when exposed to high concentrations of
pathogens (e.g. in a shelter environment).

Etiology/pathophysiology
The most commonly implicated organisms include FHV-1,
FCV, Chlamydophila felis, and Bordetella spp. Viral i­nfection
predisposes to bacterial infection, which can also act as a
primary pathogen. Viral infection usually resolves within
10 days, but it is highly contagious since viral shedding can
persist for up to 3 weeks. Moreover, affected cats can become
carriers and viral shedding may be ­reactivated during periods of stress. Virulent strains of FCV have been described,
leading to pneumonia with a high ­mortality rate.

Clinical presentation

Figure 4.10 Transverse CT image of the skull of a cat with
bilateral nasopharyngeal polyps showing both tympanic
bullae totally filled with soft tissue attenuating masses (black
arrows) and the presence of two soft tissue images in the
nasopharyngeal lumen (white arrows). (Courtesy G. Bolen)

Clinical signs are dominated by sneezing and a serous
to mucopurulent oculonasal discharge, while fever and
systemic illness (lethargy, anorexia, dehydration) are
common. C. felis is often associated with uni- or bilateral conjunctivitis and chemosis, and FCV causes lingual
ulcers and, sometimes, pneumonia.

Diagnosis
Etiology, clinical presentation, and differential
diagnosis
A primary etiology should be looked for when clinical signs of mucupurulent rhinitis improve with
antibiotic therapy but recur after discontinuation of
therapy. Tooth root infection as well as silent bacterial ­pneumonia must be ruled out as possible causes.
Tooth root infection leading to chronic or recurrent
­mucopurulent rhinitis is most commonly encountered
in middle aged to old small breed dogs (e.g. Poodles,
Yorkshire Terriers) with stomatitis associated with
dental tartar. An oronasal fistula can be found in some
cases and the discharge can be malodorous and have
a whitish granular appearance. If clinical signs appear
at a very young age, a severe metabolic problem such
as immune ­
deficiency (e.g. rhinitis/bronchopneumonia syndrome in Irish Wolfhounds) or a primary ­ciliary
defect should be ­suspected. In such cases, the nasal
­discharge is mostly associated with other clinical signs,
mainly related to lower airway recurrent infection (see
below).

Acute feline upper respiratory tract disease
Definition/overview
Acute feline URT disease is very common in cats. Young
kittens are most commonly affected, but older cats can

K22463_C004.indd 115

Viral and bacterial confirmation using isolation or PCR,
or bacterial cultures are rarely necessary in acute cases
in practice unless the disease is associated with high morbidity and mortality in a community of cats (shelters, cattery or multi-house environments).

Management and prognosis
Supportive care and systemic antibiotic therapy against
secondary bacterial infection are indicated. Many antibiotics can be used. Chlamydophila is best treated with
­doxycycline (10 mg/kg/day for 6 weeks). The efficacy of
novel treatments such as lysine and antiviral therapy
have not yet been proven in large clinical settings.
Most kittens survive but mortality is still quite high.
Vaccination against viruses may reduce the clinical signs
and limit the spread of the disease.

Chronic nonspecific lymphoplasmacytic
­rhinitis in dogs
Definition/overview
Idiopathic lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis is a common,
chronic, and gradually progressive inflammatory nasal
disease of unknown etiology associated with varying severity of clinical signs. It is characterized by
­lymphoplasmacytic to mixed inflammation of the nasal
mucosa.

26/04/16 12:35 am

116

Diseases of specific organ systems

Etiology

Management

The pathogenesis of this disease remains unknown. An
aberrant immune response to inhaled organisms or
­allergens, but not to fungi, is suspected.

In all chronic nasal diseases with epithelial h
­ yperplasia
and glandular hyperplasia, treatment should include
local therapy with saline and mucolytics, since the physiological mucociliary clearance protective mechanism is
impaired. This can be administered intranasally or by
aerosol therapy. Nebulization devices used in human
medicine can be used. Treatment entails the intranasal
instillation of saline or mucolytic drops 2–4 times daily.
Sometimes, the addition of nasal antibiotics becomes
necessary in case of secondary bacterial ­
infection.
Improvement should occur after 1–3 weeks in most cases;
other cases can remain refractory. Some authors advise
treatment with prednisone (1 mg/kg q12h for 1–2 weeks,
followed by a gradual taper) in refractory cases, although
this recommendation will vary amongst different
authors.

Pathophysiology
In chronic conditions, persistent inflammation of
the mucosa leads to loss of epithelium and squamous
metaplasia, which reduces the population of ciliated
­
cells present in the distal third of each nasal cavity.
Furthermore, hyperplastic subepithelial glands secrete
increasingly viscid mucus, which also impedes normal ciliary clearance. As a consequence, mucus plugs
­accumulate and entrap inhaled bacteria and irritating
particles within the nasal cavities, thus ­perpetuating the
­inflammation. When this material accumulates in the
distal part of the nasal cavities, it obstructs the choanae
and tends to induce reverse ­sneezing as well as heavy
efforts to clear the throat and nose.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs include sneezing, reverse sneezing, and
chronic uni- or bilateral serous or mucopurulent nasal
discharge that is characterized as tenacious and sometimes hemorrhagic in nature. The patient’s general condition is usually unaffected.

Differential diagnosis
Before a diagnosis of chronic nonspecific lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis can be made, other underlying causes
such as a nasal or nasopharyngeal foreign body, soft
palate defects (where an increased opening between the
oro- and the nasopharynx leads to misdirection of food/
saliva), nasopharyngeal atresia or stenosis, or nasopharyngeal cysts or polyp must be excluded. Any chronic
inflammatory disease of the nasal cavities caused by
bacteria or fungi can give rise to progressive chronic
­lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis. Xeromycteria (dry nose) can
also cause mild signs of chronic rhinitis.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis cannot rely on clinical signs. Diagnostic imaging and gross rhinoscopic findings are variable and nonspecific. A nasal mucosal biopsy taken during rhinoscopy
shows epithelial and glandular hyperplasia, lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, and sometimes fibrosis. It is important to perform these examinations in order to eliminate
other potential causes, such as aspergillosis, tumors,
chronic foreign body, tooth root infection, or anatomic
abnormalities, which could be treated specifically.

K22463_C004.indd 116

Prognosis
Although the condition is benign, treatment is unrewarding in some dogs, where clinical signs will fluctuate and
require prolonged treatment.

Feline idiopathic chronic rhinosinusitis
Definition/overview
Chronic rhinitis or rhinosinusitis is one of the most common chronic disorders in cats and is characterized by
chronic and/or recurrent nasal discharge and sneezing.

Etiology
Although the underlying pathogenesis is unclear, the disease is likely multifactorial. Some chronic forms are presumed to be caused by FHV-1, FCV, Chlamydophila felis, or
a combination of these agents. FHV-1 is most commonly
implicated in the chronic form of disease since more
than half of the cats exposed to the virus remain latent
carriers. Secondary bacterial infections and poorly regulated or improper immune responses also play a role in
the pathogenesis. There is some evidence that Bordetella
bronchiseptica is also a cause of chronic respiratory disease in cats. The low prevalence of FeLV and FIV infection in affected cats suggests that these viruses are not
responsible for the disease.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs include sneezing and chronic uni- or bilateral nasal discharge of a serous to mucopurulent nature,
stertor, and intermittent open-mouth breathing. The cat’s
general condition can be affected.

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

117

Diagnosis

Pathophysiology

Rarely, a primary defect can be identified (nasopharyngeal foreign body, soft palate defects, nasopharyngeal
stenosis, or nasopharyngeal cysts or polyps). Imaging
and/or rhinoscopy can reveal mild to severe turbinate
remodeling. Microbiologic identification of microorganisms does not usually help manage the disease since they
are usually secondary infections. The signs are mostly
related to irreversible remodeling of intranasal lesions
rather than to bacterial infections.

Primary inherited abnormalities include stenotic nares,
elongated soft palate, hypoplastic trachea, and, sometimes, protrusion of the nasal turbinates into the nasopharynx. In some dogs the soft palate can be too long in
addition to being exceptionally thick; macroglossia can
also occur. Secondary lesions develop as a consequence
of increased pressures on the pharyngeal, laryngeal,
and intrathoracic structures during breathing. These
lesions include everted laryngeal saccules, progressive
laryngeal collapse, and probably bronchial collapse
(mainly collapse of the left main bronchus). In addition,
subepiglottic cysts, severe edema of the dorsal aspect
of the laryngopharynx, and laryngeal granulomas
(‘­kissing lesions’) all further narrow the air passage at
the laryngeal inlet. The severity and the combination
of these abnormalities will vary. To complicate matters
even further, these same dogs can have various accompanying gastrointestinal abnormalities involving the
distal esophagus, stomach, and duodenum including
inflammatory disease with co-existing functional or
anatomic anomalies (cardial atony, gastroesophageal
reflux, gastric retention, pyloric mucosal hyperplasia,
and pyloric stenosis).

Management
Currently, treatment is supportive and aims at the consequences of nasal and sinus dysfunction, decreasing
inflammation, and eliminating secondary bacterial
infections. Cats with chronic rhinosinusitis often have
a transient response to antimicrobial treatment. Many
antibiotics can be used orally for prolonged periods (from
3 up to 8 weeks or more). When Chlamydophila is suspected,
doxycycline (10 mg/kg/day for 6 weeks) can be used.
The use of azithromycin (10–15 mg/kg q24h followed by
5 mg/kg q48h or even q72h) is helpful for treating cats
that are difficult to pill and need prolonged treatment.
Intranasal administration of drugs is difficult in most
cases because cats are usually intolerant of this treatment method.

Prognosis
Chronic rhinosinusitis is frustrating to manage. Owners
must be informed that cure is unlikely and that clinical
signs will probably not resolve. Treatment aims at reducing the frequency and severity of clinical signs.

BRACHYCEPHALIC AIRWAY OBSTRUCTIVE
SYNDROME
Definition/overview
The term BAOS refers to a disorder resulting from multiple anatomic abnormalities commonly found in brachycephalic canine breeds, mainly the English and French
Bulldog and the Pug. It is also recognized in Persian cats.

Etiology
Conformational anomalies in brachycephalic dogs are
related to breeding selection of ‘hypertypes’, which leads
to progressive shortening of the face and nose, with
subsequent shortening of the bony structures of the
skull without concurrent reduction in surrounding soft
tissues.

K22463_C004.indd 117

Clinical presentation
The abnormalities associated with the BAOS impair
air flow through the upper airways and cause clinical signs of upper airway obstruction including noisy
respiration, stridor, stertor, exercise and heat intolerance, respiratory distress, cyanosis, syncope, gagging
and retching, and sometimes sleep apnea. The clinical
signs are ­exacerbated by exercise, excitement, and high
environmental temperatures. As a result, some dogs
­
can be presented with life-threatening clinical signs of
­airway obstruction. Digestive signs such as regurgitation and vomiting are common. Secondary aspiration
pneumonia is also a common associated finding and
must be addressed.

Diagnosis
A tentative diagnosis can be based on the breed and
clinical signs. Laryngoscopy (Figures 4.11a–e) and radiography (Figure 4.12) are essential diagnostics. Other
procedures such as bronchoscopy and gastroscopy
might be necessary in order to assess the full scope of
the existing abnormalities and will be helpful in providing an accurate prognosis and the best treatment
recommendation.

26/04/16 12:35 am

118

Diseases of specific organ systems

4.11

a

c

b

d

e
Figures 4.11a–e Laryngoscopic features of BAOS. (a) Elongated soft palate; (b) everted laryngeal saccules; (c) severe edema of the
dorsal part of the laryngopharynx; (d) intralaryngeal granuloma (‘kissing lesion’); (e) localized bronchomalacia at the level of the left
mainstem bronchus.

K22463_C004.indd 118

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

4.12

Figure 4.12 Thoracic radiograph (lateral projection) of a
non-Bulldog brachycephalic dog showing tracheal hypoplasia
with a ratio of 0.14 (tracheal diameter/thoracic inlet diameter
≥0.16 for Pugs) and ventral distribution of an alveolar pattern
consistent with an aspiration pneumonia. (Courtesy G. Bolen)

Management
Animals presented with life-threatening upper airway
obstruction should be cooled, oxygenated, sedated, and
if necessary anesthetized and intubated. A tracheotomy might be indicated in cases of severe upper airway
occlusion. In other cases medical therapy consisting
of anti-inflammatory doses of short-acting glucocorticoids (prednisone, 0.5 mg/kg q12h) will suffice. Surgical
widening of stenotic nares and surgical removal of
­
excessive soft palate (Figure 4.13) and everted laryngeal saccules should be performed if there are no complicating abnormalities, such as laryngeal or tracheal
hypoplasia, which would render treatment impossible.
Corrective surgical procedures should be done as early
in life as ­possible in order to decrease the consequences
of long-term negative pressure on the airway structures
(laryngeal cartilage collapse). Once severe laryngeal dysfunction occurs, successful management is much more
difficult. Cricoarytenoid lateralization combined with
thyroarytenoid caudolateralization, arytenoid laryngoplasty, or permanent tracheoscopy might be necessary
in the setting of severe laryngeal pathology. If tracheal
hypoplasia, with its associated ventilation impairment,
is still severe after reaching adult size (at 1 year of age),
there is nothing else that can be done to remedy the
situation. Stress, excitement, and weight gain must be
avoided in these animals.
Digestive tract medical treatment combined with
upper respiratory surgery appears to decrease the
complication rate and improve the prognosis of dogs
­
­presented for upper respiratory syndrome.

K22463_C004.indd 119

119

4.13

Figure 4.13 Laryngoscopic view of a BAOS dog after surgery
(soft palate and ventriculectomy), showing persistance of
laryngeal collapse.

Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the severity of the abnormalities
and the ability to surgically correct them. Laryngeal
collapse and tracheal hypoplasia are poor prognostic
indicators.
A combination of primary and secondary changes can
progress to life-threatening laryngeal collapse in many
brachycephalic dogs. Early recognition of the primary
anatomic abnormalities is essential since it allows the clinician to make early recommendations for medical and
surgical management, which can improve the quality
of life in affected animals. Factors that may increase the
risk and further complicate the condition include obesity,
overexcitement, and exercise.

LARYNGEAL DISEASES
Laryngeal paralysis (dogs)
Definition/overview
Laryngeal paralysis (Figure 4.14) refers to lack of
­abduction of the arytenoid cartilages during inspiration
due to loss of innervation of the intrinsic musculature of
the larynx through the recurrent laryngeal nerves and
resulting in inspiratory dyspnea.

Etiology
Laryngeal paralysis is most often of unknown cause
(idiopathic laryngeal paralysis). This is most commonly observed in middle aged to old large breed animals (Labradors Retrievers seem to be predisposed).

26/04/16 12:35 am

120

Diseases of specific organ systems

4.14

Figure 4.14 Laryngeal paralysis. Endoscopic image of the
larynx during inspiration, showing a lack of abduction.

Congenital laryngeal paralysis appears to be inherited
and has been reported in breeds such as the Bouvier des
Flandres and Husky. Young Dalmatians, Rottweilers, and
Great Pyrenees can acquire laryngeal paralysis as part of
a polyneuropathy complex. Masses or trauma involving
the ventral neck region or the anterior thoracic cavity
can damage the recurrent laryngeal nerves and cause
uni- or bilateral paralysis or paresis. Laryngeal paralysis has also been reported in dogs as a manifestation
of various peripheral neuropathies or polyneuromyopathy complex, resulting from immune-mediated diseases
(such as myasthenia gravis), endocrinopathies (such as
hypothyroidism), or other systemic disorders.

Clinical presentation
The clinical signs vary in severity. The characteristic
signs of dyspnea and stridor result from increased airflow resistance occurring during inspiration. They are
initially prominent during the inspiratory phase of
respiration in association with exertion, excitement, or
exposure to high environmental temperatures. As the
reduction in laryngeal diameter worsens, the signs can
occur during both inspiration and expiration, and even
at rest. Changes in bark can also occur. Cyanosis and
­syncope are observed in advanced cases, when secondary
edema further narrows the glottis, exacerbating the signs
and creating a vicious circle. As a result, some dogs may
present with life-threatening upper airway obstruction.
Some dogs with laryngeal paralysis exhibit gagging or
coughing while eating. Secondary aspiration pneumonia
is a possible complication.

K22463_C004.indd 120

Diagnosis
The clinical features of laryngeal dysfunction are easily
identified. Direct laryngoscopic examination under light
anesthesia allows for visualization of this disorder and
differentiation from laryngeal edema, laryngeal tumor,
or collapse. Weak, fluttering movements of the ­arytenoid
cartilages and vocal folds may be observed due to changes
in airway pressure and airflow and should not be confused with normal movements. Since anesthesia impairs
laryngeal motion (moderate to deep planes of anesthesia
result in cessation of all laryngeal movement), administration of doxapram hydrochloride (1.1–2.2 mg/kg IV), a
potent respiratory stimulant, during laryngeal examination is useful for differentiating normal dogs from dogs
with laryngeal paralysis. Electromyographic studies of
the intrinsic laryngeal muscles, done under general anesthesia, and ultrasonographic evaluation of the larynx
have also been used to assess laryngeal function. Once
a diagnosis of laryngeal paralysis is established, additional diagnostic tests should be considered to identify
an underlying cause.

Management/prognosis
Animals presented with life-threatening upper airway
obstruction should be cooled, oxygenated, and sedated.
Some may require general anesthesia and intubation,
while other extreme cases require a tracheotomy. In less
severe situations, initial therapy can begin with anti-inflammatory doses of short-acting glucocorticoid drugs
(prednisone, 0.5 mg/kg q12h, followed by progressive
tapering). This reduces the inflammatory reaction and
alleviates some of the clinical signs. Surgery is inevitable and should be done as soon as possible. The recommended procedure is unilateral arytenoid lateralization.
Aspiration pneumonia is the most common postoperative
complication. Suture breakdown is another postoperative complication. However, most owners are ultimately
pleased with the outcome. Poor outcomes are associated with underlying diseases causing a generalized
polyneuropathy.

Laryngeal paralysis (cats)
Laryngeal paralysis appears to be infrequent in cats. Both
uni- and bilateral dysfunctions have been documented,
although left-sided unilateral paralysis is predominant.
This condition can result from trauma or some other
destructive process of the recurrent laryngeal nerves
or in cases where the cause is idiopathic. Conservative
­management (weight loss, minimization of excitement,

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

and anti-inflammatory therapy) and surgical treatment
are mostly successful.

121

4.15

Laryngeal tumors
Definition/overview
Laryngeal neoplasms are rare (Figures 4.15a–c). They
are mainly carcinomas, which affect middle aged to
older dogs. However, younger dogs, especially Labrador
Retrievers, can be affected with rhabdomyoma, which is a
benign tumor. Tumors of tissues surrounding the larynx,
such as thyroid carcinomas and lymphomas, can also
compress and invade the larynx, causing similar signs of
upper airway obstruction.

a

Clinical presentation
The clinical features of laryngeal tumors are similar to
those of other laryngeal diseases and include stridor, dyspnea, changes in bark, and cyanosis.

Differential diagnosis
Includes laryngeal paralysis, foreign body, abscess, and
traumatic granuloma.

Diagnosis
Primary laryngeal tumors are best identified by laryngoscopy. It is very important to make the diagnosis on the
basis of histopathologic examination of a biopsy of the
mass rather than on the gross appearance alone, since
some tumors are benign and some growths are actually
granulomas. CT can be helpful in assessing the extent of
the mass and in making a decision for surgery.

b

Management/prognosis
Benign tumors should be excised surgically and, in case
of rhabdomyoma, the prognosis is excellent when surgical excision is complete. In cases of malignant tumors,
complete surgical excision is rarely achievable, and complete laryngectomy and permanent tracheostomy are the
only surgical options.

Laryngeal edema
Definition/overview/etiology
Edema or infiltration of the larynx with inflammatory
cells occurs frequently. It can be secondary to paralysis,
tumor, or trauma, and is seen in brachycephalic dogs with
BAOS. In cats, the larynx is very sensitive and edema can
develop after faulty intubation technique or following an
excessive application of local anesthetic agent. In some
cases, the cause is not determined.

K22463_C004.indd 121

c
Figures 4.15a–c Laryngeal tumors in a cat (a) and two dogs
(b, adenocarcinoma; c, rhabdomyoma).

26/04/16 12:35 am

122

Diseases of specific organ systems

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs are those typical of an upper airway obstruction, and identical to those observed in laryngeal paralysis. They range from exercise intolerance and stridor
after excitement to life-threatening respiratory distress.

Differential diagnosis
Apart from the primary causes (paralysis, tumor, trauma,
BAOS, intubation), chronic laryngitis, due to excessive
and repeated barking, and laryngospasm (‘glottis cramp’)
can also cause some degree of laryngeal edema. In cats,
severe edema and laryngeal neoplasms can appear
similar.

Diagnosis
Laryngoscopy shows irregular proliferation, hyperemia,
and swelling of the larynx. Additional diagnostic procedures, such as biopsy or brush cytology or fine-needle
aspiration, should not be performed when the laryngeal
opening is severely reduced, unless a temporary tracheostomy is in place, especially in cats. It is prudent to first
treat the patient medically before instituting any interventional procedures.

Management/prognosis
Most animals respond to glucocorticoid therapy within a
couple of days. Prednisone (0.5–1.0 mg/kg q24h to q12h) is
used initially. The dose can be gradually tapered over the
next 3 weeks once the signs have resolved.
The prognosis is good unless the response to medical
treatment is poor. In such cases, tracheostomy should be
considered.

TRACHEAL DISORDERS
Tracheal collapse and malacic airways
Definition/overview
Tracheal collapse is a very common disorder characterized by dorsoventral flattening of the tracheal rings
with laxity of the dorsal tracheal membrane. Bronchial
collapse, essentially of the left cranial lobar bronchus, is
often present as well. The syndrome is encountered in
middle aged to older toy or miniature breeds (Yorkshire
Terrier, Miniature Poodle, Chihuahua, Pomeranian, Shih
Tzu, Lhasa Apso). The sound of the cough is a c­ haracteristic
‘honking noise’ or ‘goose honk’.

Etiology/pathophysiology
The cause is complex and is best regarded as ­multifactorial.
The development of the clinical condition requires the
presence of a primary cartilage abnormality, resulting

K22463_C004.indd 122

in intrinsic weakness of the tracheal rings, together with
secondary factors capable of initiating progression to the
symptomatic stage. These potential triggering f­actors
include obesity, cardiomegaly, inhalation of irritants
and allergens, periodontitis, respiratory infections, and
recent endotracheal intubation. The dynamic changes of
tracheal collapse may be confined to either the cervical or
thoracic region of the trachea, or both, and are frequently
more pronounced at the cervicothoracic junction. In dogs
with tracheal collapse, concurrent bronchomalacia is
­frequently encountered and does not appear to be related
to airway inflammation.
Once clinical signs occur, the syndrome is perpetuated by the cycle of chronic inflammation of the tracheal
mucosa and the accompanying cough reflex.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs include chronic cough, mild to severe panting, and varying degrees of inspiratory and expiratory
dyspnea (respiratory distress). Cyanosis can occur in
extreme cases. The cough is harsh, followed by a terminal
retch, and is generally described as ‘goose honk’, which
is precipitated by activity, excitement, tracheal pressure
(such as caused by pulling on a leash), or drinking. This
characteristic cough can be easily elicited by palpation of
the trachea.

Differential diagnosis
Includes chronic mitral valvular heart disease, which can
be a concurrent disease, chronic bronchitis, chronic tracheitis (both possibly secondary to tracheal collapse), and
chronic pulmonary parenchymal disease such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

Diagnosis
Radiographic examination of animals with a collapsed
trachea can be done with both still and motion studies.
The most useful radiographic examinations include lateral projections of the thoracic inlet, a tangential (rostrocaudal) projection of the thoracic inlet, and fluoroscopic
investigation to demonstrate movements of the dorsal
membrane during the respiratory cycle. On lateral radiographs, a redundant dorsal tracheal membrane that
invaginates into the tracheal lumen can be seen as a soft
tissue opacity along the dorsal aspect of the caudal cervical tracheal lumen. During inspiration, it will cause an
increased tracheal diameter. This condition can be seen
in both small and large breed dogs as a consequence of
coughing, and must be differentiated from a superimposed esophagus. Therefore, lateral radiographs made
during both the maximal inspiratory and expiratory
phases (Figure 4.16) of the respiratory cycle are needed

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

4.16

123

4.17

a

Figure 4.16 Lateral thoracic radiograph of an 8-year-old
Yorkshire Terrier showing probable tracheal collapse with a
decreased expiratory cervical tracheal diameter. (Courtesy
G. Bolen)

to demonstrate a dynamic collapse. Collapse of the
­cervical tracheal segment occurs in i­nspiration because
of decreased pressure within the trachea, whereas the
thoracic portion tends to collapse during the ­expiration
phase as a consequence of increased intratracheal
­pressure. These dynamic changes are best viewed in real
time using image-intensified fluoroscopy. In the skyline
projection, the trachea is seen as an oval, ‘C’ or crescent
shape.
Tracheoscopy, although rarely needed to confirm the
diagnosis, reveals a decreased dorsoventral diameter due
to flattening of the cartilagenous rings, with a ­pendulous
dorsal membrane. A severe collapse can cause ­complete
obstruction of the tracheal lumen (Figures 4.17a, b).
Tracheobronchoscopy is helpful in determining the
degree of severity of the tracheal and, especially, the
bronchial collapse, as well as in assessing concomitant
airway disease. Radiographs greatly underestimate the
incidence of bronchomalacia. Therefore, bronchoscopy
is recommended in all cases of suspected tracheal collapse before stent placement is considered, because the
presence of severe bronchomalacia and/or lower airway
disease will greatly impact on the prognosis after stent
placement.

Management
In animals with marked respiratory difficulty, oxygen
supplementation should be provided along with sedation and antitussive agents. Butorphanol (0.05–0.2 mg/
kg q4–6h) and acepromazine (0.01–0.1 mg/kg) can be

K22463_C004.indd 123

b
Figures 4.17a, b Endoscopic views of the trachea showing
grade 2 (a) and grade 4 (b) tracheal collapse.

injected SC in order to allay anxiety, and prednisolone
sodium succinate (15–30 mg/kg IV) can be administered
to decrease acute inflammation.
Long-term treatment aims principally at decreasing
potential promoting factors and the level of inflammation of the tracheal mucosa. Weight reduction in obese
animals is essential. Weight loss alone can sometimes
be curative in terms of dealing with the clinical signs.
Likewise, removal of the neck collar and its replacement
by a harness can be helpful. Removing the dog from
respiratory irritants such as noxious gases, smoke, and
dust is essential. It is also important to detect and treat
other diseases such as chronic airway disease, cardiac
disease, or Cushing’s disease.
Some authors recommend short- to long-term therapy
consisting of very low-dose steroids orally (prednisone,
0.2 mg/kg daily for 2 days to 2 weeks, followed by the
same dose every other day, then at 3-month intervals) or

26/04/16 12:35 am

124

Diseases of specific organ systems

by inhalation (fluticasone, 120 µg puff q12h using a face
mask and spacer). Short-term administration of sedatives such as acepromazine can be useful in very excited
animals to break the ‘cough/excitation/cough cycle’.
However, oversedation must be avoided because the animal will benefit from limited exercise as far as weight
gain and airway clearance is concerned. A combination
of opioid-antitussive/anticholinergic drug (diphenoxylate HCl plus atropine, 0.25 mg/kg q8–12h) is used with
great success by many clinicians. Oral antitussive agents
are effective in controlling symptoms (e.g. hydrocodone,
0.22 mg/kg q12h; or butorphanol, 0.55 mg/kg q12h).
Bronchodilators (methylxanthines or beta agonists) can
also be used, their benefits being due to a reduction in
bronchoconstriction thereby reducing intrathoracic pressures and the associated collapse of the larger airways.
Furthermore they improve mucociliary clearance and
reduce diaphragmatic fatigue.
In dogs that do not respond to medical management, a
more recent treatment involves placement of intraluminal self-expanding stenting devices. Determination of the
appropriate size and type of the stent is a critical step. In
some dogs, this minimally invasive technique is the only
successful treatment option. Tracheal prosthetic devices
are very expensive and their use is not without complications. These include stent displacement/migration,
rupture, stent detachment with development of purulent
pockets between the stent and the tracheal mucosa, and
inflammatory granuloma (Figure 4.18). The inflammatory
complications might respond to oral or nebulized glucocorticoid drugs. It is important to note that the tracheal stent
might not benefit the dog if bronchial collapse and bronchomalacia are present together with tracheal collapse.

Prognosis
Most animals can improve with an individualized treatment plan, but the condition is generally progressive and
the long-term prognosis poor, especially when irreversible airway collapse is present.

Tracheal injuries (cats)
Definition/overview
Tracheal injuries range from small lacerations to tracheal
avulsions and can be caused by intraluminal or external
trauma. Intraluminal trauma is mostly associated with
endotracheal intubation, while external trauma is most
commonly the result of blunt trauma to the thorax. Often
the diagnosis and treatment are delayed, resulting in
attempted ­surgical repair months or even years after the
injury.

K22463_C004.indd 124

4.18

Figure 4.18 Endoscopic view of the trachea of a dog 6 months
after stent placement showing exuberant granulation tissue
filling most of the tracheal lumen.

Etiology
Stenosis occurs after laceration, necrosis, or rupture following endotracheal intubation associated with over­
inflation of the endotracheal tube cuff. A blunt traumatic
incident to the neck or thorax, or both, probably includes
a hyperextension injury of the head and neck. This
stretches the trachea and ruptures it intrathoracically.

Pathophysiology
After the avulsion injury, the airway lumen is thought
to be maintained by either intact tracheal adventitia or
by thickening of mediastinal tissue, leading to the development of a pseudoairway. Rupture and avulsion of the
trachea result in stenosis of the lumen at both ends of the
injury.

Clinical presentation/diagnosis
Apart from some possible cough, clinical signs of inspiratory distress and tracheal stridor are delayed and are
due to tracheal obstruction. In acute cases, subcutaneous
emphysema can be seen over the cervical and thoracic
areas due to air escaping from the trachea into the subcutaneous tissue.
Diagnosis is confirmed by thoracic radiography and
tracheoscopy.

Management/prognosis
Surgical management consists of resection of the stenosed end(s) of the injured trachea and subsequent repair
by anastomosis. The prognosis is good.

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

Tumors
Intratracheal tumors are rare. The tracheal lumen can
also be reduced by an extrathoracic tumor, such as a
mediastinal tumor, which will cause deviation or compression of the trachea.

LOWER AIRWAY AND LUNG DISORDERS
APPROACH TO PATIENTS WITH LOWER AIRWAY
AND LUNG DISEASE
Diagnosis of lower airway disease is based on history,
physical examination, blood testing, radiography, ultrasonography, CT, and on more invasive techniques (e.g.
transtracheal aspiration, bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage [BAL], transthoracic fine-needle aspiration,
transthoracic or open-chest lung biopsy). Pulmonary
function tests are not commonly used.
Signalment, origin, present environment, vaccination, and prior medical problems must be assessed before
detailing the current complaint and previous treatment.
Signs typical of lower respiratory tract (LRT) disease
include cough, exercise intolerance, dyspnea, hypoxemia,
cyanosis, and systemic signs such as anorexia, depression, weight loss, and fever. Determination of the type of
breathing pattern is provided by inspection of the thorax.
Respiration should be observed for rate, depth, and regularity. Increased respiratory rate, which is sometimes
the only visible sign, may be difficult to differentiate
from stress-induced polypnea. Careful and symmetrical
auscultation of the lung fields may indicate increased
normal breath sounds, crackles, and wheezes as well as
silent areas. The thorax should be percussed to assess resonance. A dull note will be obtained with significant lung
consolidation and pleural effusion. Again, comparison of
percussion notes obtained on the left and right sides is
essential, especially in cases where there is a unilateral
thoracic problem.
Noninvasive methods include radiography, ultrasonography, and CT. Radiography is still the preferred
initial diagnostic test in respiratory medicine. Thoracic
radiographs are absolutely essential for proper evaluation of dogs and cats with bronchopulmonary diseases.
Thoracic radiographs should be obtained and interpreted
before doing any other more invasive procedure. Correct
radiographic technique, knowledge of thoracic anatomy,
and skilled radiographic interpretation will maximize
the amount of information derived from radiography.
Ultrasonography is used to evaluate pulmonary mass
lesions adjacent to the body wall and consolidated lung

K22463_C004.indd 125

125

lobes. The consistency of the lesions can often be determined (solid or fluid-filled) and vascular structures may
be visible (which can help diagnose lung lobe torsion). It
can also be used to guide biopsy instruments into solid
masses for specimen collection.
Echocardiography helps distinguish respiratory from
cardiac diseases. High-resolution CT is used for e­ valuation
of patients with intrathoracic diseases (e.g. interstitial
­pulmonary diseases such as idiopathic pulmonary ­fibrosis
or lung lobe torsion) or for determining the extent of
­intrathoracic mass lesions before considering surgery.
More invasive techniques for cell and tissue sampling
include transtracheal wash, endotracheal tube bronchial
wash, bronchoscopy with BAL, percutaneous fine-needle
aspiration, and lung biopsy obtained through surgical or
endoscopic thoracic exploration.
Bronchoscopy allows for examination of the tracheobronchial tree and identification and localization
of structural abnormalities of the major airways. It can
detect the presence of mucus, pus, or hemorrhage in the
airways. It is also used to assess for intraluminal foreign
bodies, granulomas, neoplasia, and parasites. It allows for
the detection of abnormal mucosal surfaces (Figure 4.19)
as well as the presence of bronchiectasis and airway
patency.
Specimen collection techniques performed in conjunction with bronchoscopy include BAL and various mucosal
biopy techniques. The latter include periendoscopic pinch
mucosal biopsy, periendoscopic mucosal brush for cytologic smears, and transbronchial biospsy. A familiarity
with the bronchoscopic anatomy of bronchopulmonary
structures is helpful. An endobronchial nomenclature for
a systematic evaluation of the canine and feline airway
4.19

Figure 4.19 Bronchoscopic view of a dog with eosinophilic
bronchopneumopathy showing the thickened and polypoid
appearance of the bronchial mucosa.

26/04/16 12:35 am

126

Diseases of specific organ systems

systems has been proposed. The nomenclature enables
the bronchoscopist to locate the lesions, to ­
correlate
bronchoscopic and diagnostic imaging findings, and
to assess the lesions throughout the course of the disease. The procedure also allows for photography of the
lesions. Animals undergoing bronchoscopy need general a
­ nesthesia, even though they are at increased risk
of anesthetic complications. Allowing for the delivery of
oxygen before, during, and after the procedure helps to
avoid oxygen desaturation, but does not remove the risk
of iatrogenic pulmonary decompensation. Other concerns include the expense of the equipment and the need
for proper training of the bronchoscopist. A pediatric
bronchoscope (diameter of about 3.6–5.0 mm) is the preferred equipment for this procedure. Bronchoscopes are
expensive, delicate, and fragile, and need to be handled,
used, and cleaned with the utmost care. Additional equipment for optimal sampling includes brush catheters and
biopsy and retrieval forceps. If available, the endoscope
should be connected to equipment with video projection
capability.
In cats with chronic cough and/or dyspnea, the procedure is considered less safe than in dogs, mainly due to
the small size of their airways and the greater degree of
airway irritability. The procedure can be performed rapidly by a skilled, experienced endoscopist, which limits
the risks to the patient.
The risk to benefit ratio should be evaluated before
each endoscopy. BAL can be performed with or without
an endoscope. The procedures require anesthesia, preoxygenation, and in cats premedication with a bronchodilator such as a single 100 µg puff of aerosolized albuterol,
administered through an inhaler and a face mask, or
terbutaline orally. Pulse oximetry should be available
throughout the procedure until full recovery. When
­performing bronchoscopic BAL, several small aliquots of
warmed sterile saline, using either weight-adjusted (2 ml/
kg) or fixed-amount volumes of lavage fluid, are instilled
either into the channel of the endoscope or through a
sterile catheter passed into this channel. It is important
that the endoscope is properly cleaned and disinfected,
including the insertion and retrieval channels, prior to
each procedure. Nonetheless, contamination of the endoscope by colonizing bacteria is not uncommon and this
possibility should always be kept in mind while interpreting microbiological results from BAL fluid analysis.
Alternatively, endotracheal tube bronchial washing or
a tracheal wash (TW) can be performed to obtain a bronchial fluid specimen. A sterile catheter is passed through
the endotracheal tube or it can be inserted between two
tracheal rings into the distal trachea. The recommended
volume of fluid varies amongst different authors with

K22463_C004.indd 126

each aliquot ranging from 5 to 15 ml. A smaller volume
consisting of 0.5 ml/kg is likely to cause less bronchospasm in cats and small breeds of dogs. For medium to
large sized dogs the lavage volume can range from 5 to
40 ml or approximately 2 ml/kg. The fluid is instilled
through the catheter and immediately aspirated. The
technique provides fluid and cells that can be used to
identify diseases involving the major airways, while
bypassing the normal flora and debris of the oral cavity
and pharynx. The advantages of this technique compared
with BAL are that the procedure is inexpensive and minimally invasive. The procedure can be performed in awake
or sedated animals. Potential complications are rare and
include tracheal laceration, subcutaneous emphysema,
and pneumomediastinum. Disadvantages are that the
lesions and site of sampling cannot be visualized and
the TW fluid analysis is less likely to identify interstitial,
alveolar, or focal disease processes compared with BAL
fluid analysis.
Both BAL and TW fluids are evaluated cytologically
and microbiologically and therefore should be collected
before initiation of antibiotic treatment whenever possible. Semiquantitative bacterial culture allows for
identification of organisms and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. Healthy dogs and cats have bacteria in their
­airways that can be cultured. Therefore, the significance
of organisms must be interpreted in conjunction with the
cytologic findings and other clinical data. Cells collected
in BAL and TW fluids are fragile and must be quickly and
meticulously processed. Nucleated cell counts and differential cell counts are performed. The cells are evaluated
qualitatively for determination of the type of inflammation (neutrophilic, eosinophilic), evidence of macrophage
activation, neutrophil degeneration, lymphocyte reactivity, characteristics of malignancy, and presence of infectious agents.
Transthoracic needle biopsy is very useful in identifying diffuse interstitial peripheral lesions and solitary
lesions of the lung that are located adjacent to the thoracic wall. It also allows for sampling and identification
of infectious agents. Samples can be collected using largebore biopsy or fine-needle aspiration techniques. The site
for sampling must be carefully selected radiographically,
and the accuracy of sampling can be improved by using
ultrasonographic guidance. In most cases this technique
does not require general anesthesia and does not require
expensive or sophisticated material. Potential complications with fine-needle aspiration, although rare, include
pneumothorax, hemoptysis, and bleeding.
Open-chest biopsy is a diagnostic test of last resort
because of the invasiveness, cost, degree of morbidity,
and danger of mortality associated with this technique.

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

127

It is advised when exploratory thoracotomy might also
be therapeutic or when it will result in confirmation of a
negative prognosis (diffuse metastasis) and justification
for euthanasia during surgery.
Video-assisted thoracoscopy, allowing lung biopsy as
well as therapeutic procedures, is a very helpful technique since it is much less invasive than open-chest
procedures, but offers the same advantages of direct visualization and sampling of the lesion. However, this technique requires special skills and expensive equipment,
thus limiting its availability.
Pulmonary function tests can be useful in the diagnosis and evaluation of patients with pulmonary disease.
LRT diseases can result in inadequate oxygenation due
to decreased ventilation, improper matching of ventilation and perfusion within the lung (V/Q mismatching),
and interference with the diffusion of gases across the
alveolar membrane. Diseases in small animals can affect
these two major physiological functions. Blood gas measurement and calculation of alveolar and arterial oxygen
concentrations (A–a gradient) is currently available for
assessment of impaired lung function with regard to gas
exchange. Normal PaO2 values range from 80 to 100 mmHg.
Hemoglobin saturation with oxygen, and thus whole blood
content, does not begin to decrease greatly until the PaO2
falls below 60 mmHg. Other pulmonary function tests are
difficult to apply in veterinary medicine because most of
them depend on patient cooperation during the testing
procedure or require expensive and sophisticated equipment. Pulmonary scintigraphy is a noninvasive technique
used to assess pulmonary ventilation and perfusion, but
this test is not routinely available to most veterinarians.
Other noninvasive functional testing that has been developed in awake unrestrained dogs and cats includes tidal
breathing flow volume loops, measurement of lung compliance, and the 6-minutes walk test.

the following pathogens: Bordetella ­bronchiseptica,
canine ­
parainfluenza virus, canine influenza virus,
canine adenovirus, and canine respiratory coronavirus.
B. ­bronchiseptica is a gram-negative, aerobic coccobacillus
that is recognized as a primary cause of respiratory disease in dogs. It can also be a serious complicating factor
in dogs simultaneously infected with a viral pathogen.
Bordetella and canine parainfluenza virus have commonly been described as the principal pathogens recovered from dogs involved in CIRD outbreaks.

CANINE INFECTIOUS RESPIRATORY DISEASE
COMPLEX IN YOUNG DOGS (‘KENNEL COUGH’)

Diagnosis of bordetellosis relies on positive bacterial
culture or, more recently, on positive PCR from BAL
fluid. Several laboratories offer PCR testing; however,
studies investigating the reliability of this method
are lacking. It is difficult to interpret the significance
of a positive PCR test result for this disease because
B. bronchiseptica can be commonly isolated from the
URT of clinically healthy dogs, in addition to the fact
that a recovered asymptomatic dog may still shed the
organism for ­several weeks. Finding pleiomorphic cocci
or coccobacilli adhering to the cilia of the epithelial
cells is reported to be a characteristic cytologic feature
(Figure 4.20).

Definition/overview
Canine infectious respiratory disease (CIRD) complex is
also known as ‘kennel cough’. The disease is commonly
seen in young dogs that have been in boarding kennels.
This contagious disease is often self-limiting in dogs, but
a wide range of respiratory signs can be found.

Etiology
Athough many agents have been implicated, CIRD
­usually results from infection by any one or more of

K22463_C004.indd 127

Pathophysiology
Adherence of B. bronchiseptica to cilia via adhesion molecules, induction of ciliostasis, and damage to ciliated
epithelium have been implicated in the pathogenesis
of Bordetella infection. Given the ability of this bacterium to regulate its virulence and the likelihood that
co-infected dogs tend to experience more serious clinical disease than dogs infected with single agents, viral
co-infection could influence B. bronchiseptica virulence
and clinical manifestations of CIRD in an individual
patient.
Young dogs are more susceptible, especially those
housed within a high population density environment,
since the viruses and Bordetella are highly contagious.
Despite the widespread availability of Bordetella vaccines, the disease is still common.

Clinical presentation
CIRD is often self-limiting in dogs. In the typical ­infection,
a mild dry cough is the only clinical ­symptom. However,
infection with Bordetella can elicit a chronic cough
that is more challenging to cure. Respiratory signs
may range from mild illness to severe life-threatening
pneumonia.

Diagnosis

26/04/16 12:35 am

128

Diseases of specific organ systems

4.20

invasion.These include the mechanisms of coughing
and mucociliary clearance, local ­
immunoglobulin
(­
particularly IgA), and cellular and humoral defense
mechanisms. Macrophages are responsible for phagocytosis and intracellular killing, and inhibition of macrophage function by viral infections, such as d
­ istemper, and
corticosteroid use has a major role in the d
­ evelopment of
secondary bacterial infection.

Pathophysiology

Figure 4.20 Pleiomorphic cocci or coccobacilli found adhering
to the cilia of the epithelial cells in a dog with bordetellosis.

Management
Treatment generally consists of empirical antimicrobial
therapy. Doxycycline is one of several drugs that can be
used effectively. Dogs that are unresponsive to oral or
parenteral antibiotics may respond to a nebulized form
of administration. Aerosolized topically nonabsorbable
antibacterials such as gentamicin have been shown to be
effective in reducing the population of B. bronchiseptica
organisms in the trachea and bronchi of infected dogs.

BACTERIAL BRONCHOPNEUMONIA
Definition/overview
Bronchopneumonia of bacterial origin is much more
frequently diagnosed in dogs than in cats, although
it might be underdiagnosed in cats. In dogs, many
underlying problems can be associated with bacterial
bronchopneumonia.

Etiology
A wide variety of bacteria can result in bronchopneumonia, mostly as opportunistic invaders. A single pathogen
such as Escherichia coli, Pasteurella multocida, staphylococci, streptococci, or Klebsiella pneumoniae can be isolated in the majority of cases, but mixed infections are
common. Bacteria enter the LRT primarily by inhalation
or aspiration or by hematogenous routes. Whether or
not a respiratory infection will develop depends on the
complex interplay of many factors, such as interference
with natural defense mechanisms. Multiple host defense
mechanisms exist to protect the LRT from damage secondary to inhaled materials and from possible microbial

K22463_C004.indd 128

The possibility of an underlying problem should not
be overlooked since bacterial infection can complicate
nearly any other respiratory disease. There are many
clinical conditions that predispose animals to bacterial pneumonia, and these include viral, mycoplasmal,
or fungal respiratory infections, metabolic disorders,
immunosuppressive therapy, therapy with specific drugs
(aspirin, digoxin), functional and anatomic disorders
(obstruction of upper airways, tracheal hypoplasia, primary ciliary dyskinesia), immunodeficiency (phagocyte
or lymphocyte dysfunction), and contaminated indwelling catheters. Diseases causing dysphagia and vomiting
and reduced levels of consciousness can result in foreign material being inhaled into the lung and aspiration
pneumonia.

Clinical presentation
Animals with bacterial bronchopneumonia can present
with signs typical of lower respiratory disease, such as
cough, exercise intolerance, dyspnea, nasal discharge,
and cyanosis, in addition to systemic signs of anorexia,
depression, weight loss, and fever, the degree of which
will vary between patients. However, none of these signs
can be used to confirm or rule out bacterial pneumonia.
Animals with mild or localized disease show no obvious
signs. Most dogs with bronchopneumonia will cough, but
many will show only labored breathing. The severity of
aspiration pneumonia will vary according to the characteristics of the inspired material and the patient’s health
status prior to aspiration.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of bacterial bronchopneumonia is based
on history, physical examination, blood testing, and
radiographic studies. Other tests such as transtracheal
aspiration, bronchoscopy and BAL, and transthoracic
fine-needle aspiration are used if deemed necessary.
Physical examination signs can include tachycardia and
weak pulses, hyperemic oral mucous membranes, and
dehydration. Determination of the type of breathing
pattern is useful. An increased respiratory effort with

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

an exaggerated abdominal component is common. Nasal
flaring also occurs. Auscultation can detect absent or
increased lung sounds depending on the degree of pulmonary consolidation.
Thoracic radiography is an essential component of the
diagnostic evaluation. The radiographs may show only
an interstitial pattern early in the disease. An alveolar
pattern develops as the disease progresses. Distribution
of lesions may also be helpful in identifying underlying
problems. Focal lesions may be associated with foreign
bodies. Involvement of the dependent lung lobes commonly occurs with pneumonia with or without aspiration
(Figure 4.21). Hematogenous-borne infections may have
a caudodorsal distribution. Diagnosis may be confirmed
by microbiologic and cytologic examination of material
from the tracheobronchial tree or lung through aspirates,
washings, or brushing performed by transtracheal aspiration, bronchoscopy, or fine-needle lung aspiration.
A CBC may reveal a neutrophilic leukocytosis and left
shift with a monocytosis. It is not uncommon to find only
a stress response or even a normal leukogram.
Adequate bronchopulmonary sampling techniques
for cytologic evaluation and culture of aspirates include
tracheal washing, BAL, or brushing and percutaneous fine-needle aspirations. Bacterial culture is more
sensitive than cytology for identifying organisms and
also allows for susceptibility testing. However, bacteria
can be cultured from the airways of healthy dogs. This
microbacterial population has the potential to cause or
complicate respiratory infections and clouds the interpretation of airway and lung cultures. Therefore, the
significance of organisms must be interpreted in conjunction with the cytologic findings and other clinical
data. Quantitative culture of BAL fluid is advised since
the threshold to define clinically relevant bacterial
growth in diagnosing LRT infection has been determined (1.7 x 103 colony-forming units per ml of BAL
fluid).

Management
Antimicrobial therapy is essential for the treatment of
lower airway bacterial infections. The most important
criterion for selection of an antibiotic is identification of
the bacterial organism and the results of sensitivity testing. There appears to be much variability in the i­n-vitro
sensitivity of common isolates in different countries,
emphasizing the importance of culture and sensitivity
testing for individual patients. Broad-spectrum coverage
for life-threatening infections or sepsis can be obtained
using combinations of either amoxicillin–clavulanic acid
and enrofloxacin or amoxicillin–clavulanic acid and an

K22463_C004.indd 129

129

4.21

Figure 4.21 Thoracic radiograph of a dog with aspiration
pneumonia showing ventral distribution of an alveolar pattern
with air bronchograms and lobar signs.

aminoglycoside. Fluoroquinolones specifically achieve
excellent concentrations within the lung.
Systemic oral or parenteral antibiotics should be
administered in high doses for a minimum of 2 weeks
and sometimes longer so that maximum concentrations are reached in lung tissue and airway secretions.
Obvious clinical improvement will optimally be noted
after 3–5 days of treatment. Ideally, the animal should be
re-examined weekly in order to monitor the response to
treatment, based on clinical and radiographic findings.
Therapy may be discontinued 1 week after resolution
of all clinical signs and the disappearance of the radiographic infiltrates.
Maintenance of normal systemic hydration is very
important for mucociliary clearance and secretion mobilization. Airway hydration can also be achieved using
saline aerosol therapy followed by physiotherapy (mild
forced exercise, increasing cough frequency by chest wall
coupage or tracheal manipulation, and postural drainage). The use of aerosol administration of antibacterials or
other drugs should be restricted to cases of bordetellosis.
Animals with severe tachypnea, dyspnea, or hypoxemia (PaO2 <60 mmHg) require oxygen therapy. The
oxygen should be humidified to prevent drying of respiratory membranes. Oxygen can be administered by oxygen cage, mechanical ventilator, intratracheal cannula,
or nasal catheter. Antitussives and antihistamines that
inhibit mucokinesis and exudate removal are contraindicated with bacterial pneumonia.
Although the value of expectorant therapy (saline
expectorants, guaifenesin, and inhaled volatile oils that
are inhaled) has not been scientifically demonstrated,
their use can be beneficial.

26/04/16 12:35 am

130

Diseases of specific organ systems

4.22

Pulmonary lobectomy can be an alternative in the
management of pneumonia in dogs, especially if a diagnosis of abscessation is suspected or if a lesion does not
resolve after several months of aggressive adequate antibiotic therapy.

Prognosis
Bacterial pneumonias are generally responsive to appropriate antibiotic therapy and supportive care. The severity and chronicity of the infection, the presence of an
underlying disease, and the development of complications can affect the long-term prognosis. Potential reasons for failure are many. They may be related to the
organism involved (not sensitive to the antibiotic used
or capable of developing resistance) or to the antibiotic
itself. Failures attributable to the drug may relate to the
dosage regimen, spectrum of activity, or ability to achieve
effective concentration. Other causes of failure include
inaccurate diagnosis or existence of an undiagnosed
underlying disorder.

PRIMARY CILIARY DYSKINESIA
Definition/overview
Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), previously referred to
as immotile cilia syndrome, results from a heterogeneous
group of inherited diseases that cause defective ciliary
motility mostly associated with ultrastructural abnormalities. It is a predisposing cause of recurrent bacterial
pneumonia. In dogs, as in humans, the ineffectiveness
and incoordination of ciliary function result in ineffective clearance of mucus from the airways, which in turn
results in chronic mucus plugging and inflammation
of nasal cavities and airways. Kartagener’s syndrome
represents a triad of signs that includes bronchiectasis,
complete transposition of viscera (situs inversus), and
chronic rhinosinusitis (Figures 4.22a, b). This syndrome
has been reported in humans and in dogs with PCD. In
dogs, PCD is a rare disease that has been reported in more
than 19 breeds.

a

Etiology
Currently, PCD-causing mutations have been identified in
20 human genes. Each causative gene can be associated
with particular ultrastructural ciliary defects and these
20 genes only explain 50% of human PCD cases; more
genes need to be identified. In dogs, a recent mutation in
a new causative gene (CCDC39) has been identified in the
Old English Sheepdog. This new mutation is dispersed in
a significant worldwide population and is responsible for
PCD in this breed. A new genetic test has been developed
and is currently available for breeding purposes.

K22463_C004.indd 130

b
Figures 4.22a, b Old English Sheepdog with primary ciliary
dyskinesia associated with situs inversus. (a) Dorsoventral
thoracic radiograph. (b) Transmission electron microscope
image of transverse sections of cilia showing a primary defect
(absence of the central pair of doublets) and many secondary
defects.

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

Clinical presentation
As a consequence of impaired mucociliary clearance, clinical signs include chronic respiratory abnormalities such
as rhinosinusitis, bronchitis, bronchopneumonia, and
bronchiectasis. Although the respiratory system signs
are usually the presenting complaint, other signs related
to pathology in other tissues with ciliated epithelia or
microtubules can occur, such as otitis media, infertility in
females, asthenoteratospermia in males, hydrocephalus,
and renal fibrosis or dilation of renal tubules. The signs
typically begin at an early age in a purebred vaccinated
dog; however, some dogs have remained asymptomatic
until several months to several years of age. Hallmark
clinical features (i.e. recurrent bilateral nasal discharge
and repeated episodes of bronchitis or bronchopneumonia since birth) should alert the clinician to include PCD
in the differential diagnosis.

Diagnosis
Finding the hallmark clinical features in combination
with situs inversus is even more suggestive. Most other
potential possible causes should be excluded by a complete physical examination as well as currently available
complementary tests. Confirmation of a diagnosis of PCD
requires both in-vivo and in-vitro functional and ultrastructural analysis of cilia. In-vitro functional analysis of
cilia in dogs suspected of having PCD utilizes scintigraphy
as the diagnostic tool to evaluate mucociliary clearance.
In-vivo functional analysis in PCD consistently demonstrates an uncoordinated or a dyskinetic ciliary beat.
Transmission electron microscopy can reveal specific
ultrastructural abnormalities, although regularly the
distinction between PCD and secondary ciliary defects
(caused by another primary disease) based on ultrastructural findings is difficult.
Other causes of recurrent bacterial infection of the
lower airways should be investigated, such as the presence of an immune deficiency, a resistant bacterium, a
bronchial foreign body, or any other predisposing cause
(see above). In Irish Wolfounds, a rhinitis/bronchopneumonia syndrome characterized by transient to persistent
mucoid or mucopurulent rhinorrhea, cough, and dyspnea
since an early age has been described; so far PCD has not
yet been formally identified as the cause of the disease in
this particular breed.

Management
Even though PCD is not a curable disease, it can frequently be managed for some years. A key element in
successful management is adequate monitoring of infecting microorganisms and judicious use of antibiotics over

K22463_C004.indd 131

131

time. Moreover, a regular routine consisting of good systemic and local hydration, daily coupage, and vigorous
exercise will help to clear mucus from the airways.

Prognosis
The long-term prognosis is poor, since even in cases with
adequate management, the disease generally progresses
over time and the response to treatment worsens. It
would be very useful to have a genetic test able to identify carriers in order to prevent their use for breeding.

PARASITIC BRONCHOPNEUMOPATHY IN DOGS,
ANGIOSTRONGYLOSIS (FRENCH HEARTWORM
DISEASE)
Definition/overview/etiology
The nematode worm Angiostrongylus vasorum is an
emerging disease, with reported increases in both distribution and incidence in the United Kingdom, Europe,
South Africa, and Canada. The expanding geographic
range might be related to the influence of the climate on
parasite distribution.
The worm infects dogs and foxes and is spread
through ingestion of intermediate hosts, including slugs
and snails, harboring infective third-stage larvae. The
adult parasites live in the pulmonary arteries and the
right ­ventricule of the heart. The prepatent period is
40–60 days.
Respiratory disease results from the inflammatory
response induced by migration of the larvae, causing
granulomatous pneumonia and probably thrombotic
disease.

Clinical presentation
Infection seems more common in outdoor young dogs,
especially those playing with/eating slugs. Dogs are
presented for a combination of signs including cough,
exercise intolerance, respiratory distress, coagulopathy
(hemoptysis, bleedings), lameness, neurologic signs, and
syncope. However, clinical signs may be variable and
range from subtle and chronic to more acute and severe.

Diagnosis
Eosinophilia, thrombocytopenia, and hyperglobulinemia
are relatively common. Thoracic radiographs generally
show an interstitial and/or alveolar pattern, most often
present in the dorsocaudal lung fields. Definitive parasitologic diagnosis relies on observation of first-stage larvae
(L1) in the respiratory tract or feces, using the Baermann
test. L1 are sometimes observed on airway cytology. A
major limitation of the Baermann test is that L1 excretion

26/04/16 12:35 am

132

Diseases of specific organ systems

appears to be intermittent, and infected dogs might be
negative on fecal examination. A single Baermann test
is likely to detect at most 50% of infected dogs, although
sensitivity can be increased by serial examination (e.g. of
samples collected 3 days in succession, which is not always
practical).
Improved diagnostic tests are likely to emerge.
Parasite proteins or DNA can be detected in blood or BAL
fluid using sandwich ELISA or PCR, respectively. Serologic
ELISA tests to detect host antibodies to the parasite have
also been developed.

Management
Fenbendazole (25–50 mg/kg PO q24h for 7–21 days) has
been the most commonly used anthelminthic drug during
the last decade. Milbemycin oxime and moxidectin (e.g.
Advantage Multi®, a spot-on combination formulation of
moxidectin plus imidacloprid) both prevent establishment of adult parasites when given during the prepatent
period, and substantially reduce worm burdens. However,
continued monitoring after treatment is advisable, with
repeated treatment as necessary. Depending on the
severity of clinical signs, additional therapy with corticosteroids, IV fluid support, and oxygen can be required.

Prognosis
Dogs carrying a low worm burden may remain subclinical. The prognosis is guarded in those animals with severe
respiratory signs. The disease can be fatal if left untreated.

EOSINOPHILIC BRONCHOPNEUMOPATHY
IN DOGS
Etiology/pathophysiology
Canine eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy (EBP) is a disease characterized by eosinophilic infiltration of lung
and bronchial mucosa, considered to be manifestations
of immunologic hypersensitivity. Although the etiology
of EBP is still unknown, the association of eosinophilic
infiltration with CD4+ T cells favors a likely Th2 immune
response mounted in the lower airways. Suspected
and known causes of pulmonary hypersensitivities in
humans and animals include fungi, molds, drugs, bacteria, and parasites. However, in many cases no underlying
cause is found. The role of inhaled allergens in EBP is still
unclear. EBP is mostly diagnosed in young dogs. Siberian
Huskies and Malamutes are predominantly affected but
many other breeds also can be affected.

Clinical presentation
Usually, the general condition of the animal is good,
unless the disease is associated with concomitant bacterial bronchopneumonia. Clinical signs include mainly

K22463_C004.indd 132

cough, gagging, and retching. In acute cases, gagging and
retching are sometimes the main complaint, extending
the differential diagnosis to dyspeptic problems. Dyspnea
is a very frequent sign. Nasal discharge (about 50% of
affected dogs) is less commonly encountered.

Differential diagnosis
Several parasites including Strongyloides spp., Ascaris
spp., Toxocara canis, and Ancylostoma spp. can lead to
eosinophilic pneumonia in humans, and probably in dogs
as well; respiratory symptoms are mild and gastroenterologic signs usually predominate.
In the dog, occult heartworm disease caused by
Dirofilaria immitis can cause eosinophilic pneumonitis.
Migration of larvae of Angiostrongylus vasorum through
pulmonary parenchyma may also result in eosinophilic
pneumonia in dogs (see above). Other bronchopulmonary parasites, such as Capillaria aerophila, Oslerus osleri,
Filaroides hirthi, Crenosema vulpis, or Paragonimus kellicotti, are also implicated in the migration of eosinophils
into the airways (O. osleri) or lungs (other parasites) in
dogs, and can mimic EBP.

Diagnosis
The diagnostic work up of dogs with pulmonary disease
should include a search for parasitic disease, using BAL
fluid analysis or feces examination (fecal zinc sulfate
centrifugation/flotation and Baermann sedimentation
procedure). However, a single negative fecal examination
by either method is not conclusive. The fecal examination
should therefore be repeated or, alternatively, the animal
treated for potential parasites using a course of an appropriate anthelmintic (e.g. fenbendazole, thiabendazole, or
levamisole). In endemic areas it is strongly advised to run
a heartworm antigen test to rule out occult heartworm
disease.
The diagnostic criteria for the diagnosis of EBP include
anamnestic factors (breed, young age, previous response
to corticosteroids), clinical signs, radiographic and bronchoscopic findings, blood eosinophilia, tissue eosinophilic
infiltration as demonstrated by cytologic and histopathologic examinations, response to adequate treatment, and
the exclusion of other pulmonary conditions. The most common radiographic finding is a mixed moderate to severe
bronchointerstitial pattern (Figure 4.23a). Bronchoscopy
can reveal typical macroscopic features, which include the
presence of abundant yellow–green mucus or mucopurulent material, severe thickening of the mucosa with irregular or polypoid surface (see Figure 4.19), and in some
cases partial airway closure during expiration. Peripheral
blood eosinophilia is frequently found (about 60% of the
cases) but not always observed. BAL fluid or brush cytology demonstrates a marked eosinophilic component

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

4.23

133

clinical signs and reduction in side-effects, and allows for
a reduction of oral steroid dosage in steroid-dependent
animals.

Prognosis
Relapse frequently occurs within weeks to months after
drug discontinuation, although some dogs may remain
asymptomatic after discontinuation of glucocorticoid
treatment.

CHRONIC BRONCHITIS IN DOGS
a

Definition/overview
Chronic bronchitis is mostly seen in middle aged to old
smaller breeds of dogs, but it can occur in larger breeds.
It is a chronic inflammatory airway disease that results
mainly in cough.
Chronic bronchitis in dogs is defined when three diagnostic criteria can be fulfilled:

●● Chronic cough.
●● Evidence of excessive

mucus or of mucus
hypersecretion.
●● Exclusion of other chronic cardiopulmonary diseases
(e.g. congestive heart failure, chronic infectious bronchopneumonia, pulmonary neoplasia, eosinophilic
bronchopneumopathy).
b
Figures 4.23a, b Four-year-old male Akita Inu with eosinophilic
bronchopneumopathy. (a) Lateral thoracic radiograph showing
a severe bronchointerstitial pattern with peribronchial
infiltration. (b) Cytologic preparation (BAL fluid cytospin)
showing 47% of eosinophils (total cell count = 7,000 cells/ml).

(Figure 4.23b); frequently, more than 50% of the inflammatory cells are eosinophils. In most cases, eosinophilic
infiltration of the bronchial mucosa can also be observed
histopathologically in biopsy samples.

Management
The response to steroid therapy is generally very good
(prednisone, initial dosage of 1 mg/kg q12h for the 1st
week, then on alternate days during the 2nd and 3rd
weeks, followed by a gradual decrease to the lowest possible maintenance dose). Inhaled glucocorticoid therapy
can be considered for long-term maintenance in order
to help avoid the systemic complications of chronic glucocorticoid treatment, although this might not allow for
complete clinical control of the disorder. This treatment
modality is well tolerated, results in improvement in

K22463_C004.indd 133

Co-existing diseases (e.g. congestive heart failure and
airway collapse) may be present and complicate diagnosis and treatment. The most common sequela is chronic
airway obstruction, referred to as chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, a syndrome that is well described in
humans.

ETIOLOGY
Many causes of chronic bronchitis are a result of chronic
airway irritation and inflammation. The condition is
usually diagnosed after a protracted period (>2 months)
of clinical signs that can result from exposure to passive
smoking, excessive environmental perfumes, or atmospheric pollution.

Pathophysiology
Chronic bronchitis results in inflammatory changes
within the bronchial mucosa, including increased mucus
production. Bronchial wall thickening and progressive
bronchomalacia contribute to airflow obstruction and
further worsening of the inflammation and clinical signs,
which consist mainly of a productive cough.

26/04/16 12:35 am

134

Diseases of specific organ systems

Clinical presentation
Middle aged to older smaller dog breeds are more often
affected, although any dog that is exposed to chronic airway irritants or has suffered from smoke inhalation can
be similarly affected. Most dogs with chronic bronchitis
have a rather sonorous cough, which is followed by a
retching movement.

Differential diagnosis
Chronic cough related to specific causes should be ruled
out, mainly tracheal collapse, lung fibrosis, EBP, parasitic
lung diseases, bronchial or lung primary or secondary
tumors, mitral valve disease.

Diagnosis
Diagnostic tests are carried out to rule out other causes of
chronic cough. The hemogram is usually normal and thoracic radiographs show bronchial wall thickening or generalized increased airway-oriented interstitial density, or
both. BAL cytology typically has excess mucus with hyperplastic epithelial cells and increased numbers of neutrophils, goblet cells, and macrophages. Echocardiography
helps to diagnose any concomitant disorders such as
mitral valve disease and right heart enlargement associated with pulmonary aterial hypertension, which can
occur secondary to chronic pulmonary disease.

Management
The bronchial alterations are not readily medically
reversible. Therapy is based on an assessment of the
nature and severity of the individual animal’s problems
and includes:

●
●
●

●

Avoidance of airway irritants and neck compression.
Control of body weight because obese dogs often show
improvement associated with weight reduction.
Relief of airway inflammation: anti-inflammatory
therapy using a low dose of glucocorticosteroids,
which reduces mucus hypersecretion and mucosal
bronchial wall thickening. Bronchodilators (β2 agonists, theophylline) are frequently used, although
their effectiveness in the treatment of chronic bronchitis has not been widely addressed.
Control of infection and maintaining good dental
hygiene.

Prognosis
Treatment can alleviate clinical symptoms but ongoing
airway disease will likely persist.

K22463_C004.indd 134

CHRONIC IDIOPATHIC PULMONARY FIBROSIS
IN WEST HIGHLAND WHITE TERRIERS AND
OTHER TERRIER BREEDS
Definition/overview
Chronic idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) in West
Highland White Terriers and other terrier breeds is an
emerging chronic and progressive pulmonary condition.
It has been described in middle aged to old West Highland
White Terriers, but also in other young to m
­ iddle aged
­terrier dogs such as the Staffordshire Bull Terrier. A similar condition exists in humans. Very little is known about
IPF prevalence, pathogenesis, and prognosis in dogs.

Etiology
As in humans, the etiopathogenesis of IPF in dogs is
not known. There is emerging evidence for the role of
genetic factors in the development of the disease. Most
cases appear to be caused by an interaction between a
specific environmental exposure and a genetic predisposition. In dogs, the predisposition of related terrier
breeds combined with very low incidence within nonterrier breeds also strongly suggests an underlying
genetic cause.

Pathophysiology
Current prevailing hypotheses for the condition focus
on dysregulated epithelial–mesenchymal interactions
promoting a cycle of continued epithelial cell injury and
fibroblast activation leading to fibrosis. Multiple abnormalities in a myriad of biological pathways affecting
inflammation and wound repair, including matrix regulation, epithelial reconstitution, the coagulation cascade,
neovascularization, and antioxidants, modulate this
defective process and promote fibrogenesis.

Clinical presentation
The disease is clinically characterized by progressive
dyspnea, exercise intolerance, and pronounced crackles
on auscultation. General body condition is good and dogs
do not lose weight. Cough is described principally in the
earliest phase of the disease. The condition might also
be associated with some degree of tracheal collapse that
develops secondarily in some dogs.

Differential diagnosis
The disease is not easily distinguished from chronic bronchitis, which may co-exist. In IPF, cough can be attributed
to tracheal collapse, which is found in a proportion of
affected dogs. Crackles might suggest cardiogenic edema;

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

however, such a diagnosis is not compatible with other
clinical findings.

Diagnosis
Radiographic, bronchoscopic, hematologic, or biochemical findings are nonspecific, but help to eliminate other
possible disorders. Echocardiography may reveal signs of
secondary pulmonary arterial hypertension.
Arterial blood gas analysis shows low levels of PaO2
and a high alveolar–arterial oxygen gradient. Other noninvasive pulmonary function tests are rarely used in veterinary practice.
Lung imaging using high-resolution CT looks promising and is currently often used to evaluate IPF in
humans. However, ultimate confirmation of the diagnosis requires (open-chest) lung biopsy and histopathology. Histopathologically, the predominant changes
include septal and interstitial fibrosis and pneumocyte
hyperplasia.

135

and microbes, which eventually leads to secondary
­infection and its accompanying inflammatory response,
creating a vicious cycle of further damage to the airway
wall and predisposition to recurrent bronchopulmonary
infections.

Clinical presentation/diagnosis
There appears to be a breed predilection since bronchiectasis is more prevalent in certain breeds such as the
American Cocker Spaniel, Miniature Poodle, Siberian
Husky, and English Springer Spaniel. Most dogs with
bronchiectasis are 7 years of age or older. The cinical
signs are typical of chronic bronchial disease and include
cough, gagging, tachypnea, dyspnea, and occasionally
fever.

Diagnosis
Bronchiectasis can be detected by thoracic radiography,
high-resolution CT, or bronchoscopy.

Management/prognosis

Management

As the disease is a progressive condition, the long-term
prognosis is poor. A mean survival time of about 18
months has been reported. The course of the disease is
characterized by a slow progression together with episodes of worsening. Treatment of dogs with IPF is essentially symptomatic and supportive. Glucocorticoid drugs
have been tried but have not proved beneficial, while
subjecting the dog to potentially detrimental side-effects.

Treatment is the same as for chronic bronchitis, but the
­disease is more difficult to control. The goal of therapy
is to control clinical signs and eliminate any bacterial
­infections. Removing any likely pulmonary irritants from
the dog’s environment is essential to slow the progression
of bronchial wall destruction. Dogs with bronchiectasis
may survive for years despite substantial clinical abnormalities. Patients with focal bronchiectasis might benefit
from surgical resection of the pathologic lung lobe.

BRONCHIECTASIS
Definition/overview
Bronchiectasis is pathologically defined as an abnormal
and permanent dilatation and distortion of ­subsegmental
airways due to destruction of the elastic and muscular
components of the bronchial walls. Several congenital or
acquired conditions that lead to a cycle of chronic airway
infection and inflammation may result in bronchiectatic
changes.

Etiology/pathophysiology
Focal bronchiectasis most often results from foreign body
aspiration. Diffuse bronchiectasis often occurs subsequent to aspiration or inhalation injury, primary ciliary
dyskinesis, infection with Bordetella bronchiseptica or
Pneumocystis carinii (in relation to immune deficiency),
eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy, and chronic bronchitis. Affected airways are usually partially obstructed
by purulent or viscid exudates since the dilation greatly
interferes with normal airway clearance. Dysfunction of
mucociliary clearance allows pooling of mucus, e­ xudates,

K22463_C004.indd 135

PULMONARY CONTUSIONS
Etiology
Pulmonary contusion is caused by blunt trauma. It is
a common finding in dogs that have received thoracic
trauma and can be associated with pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, rib fracture, and many other adverse
effects of the traumatic insult. Hemorrhage into the
interstitium and alveoli occurs, usually in localized lung
regions.

Clinical presentation
Generally there is historical and physical evidence of
trauma. Increased respiratory efforts are usually obvious, but the clinical picture will depend on the effects of
other ongoing injury.

Diagnosis
Alveolar infiltrates are seen on thoracic radiographs
along with other signs of thoracic injury. They include
large localized areas of alveolar and interstitial opacities.

26/04/16 12:35 am

136

Diseases of specific organ systems

(Editors’ note: Pulmonary hemorrhage can also occur
from anticoagulant rodenticide ingestion. The history,
absence of other signs of trauma, and abnormal blood
clotting times will distinguish this from traumatic pulmonary contusions.)

may lead to permanent pathology, evidenced by progressive airway remodeling including bronchectasis,
fibrosis, or emphysema. Sometimes, reversible atelectasis can occur.

Management

Prognosis varies from good to guarded depending on the
extent of the injuries. Progression of pulmonary injuries
to acute respiratory distress syndrome is an ominous
complication.

Young to middle aged cats are most commonly affected.
The clinical signs are cough and increased breathing
effort, which can vary in severity. The signs are often
chronic or slowly progressive. Mildly affected cases may
only have occasional and brief episodes of cough separated by long periods without symptoms, while in moderately or severely affected cases, cough occurs daily and
cats may have a decreased quality of life with breathing
discomfort. Cats with severe exacerbations (also called
‘asthmatic crisis’) may present acutely with open-mouth
breathing, dyspnea, and cyanosis. Exacerbation may
occur in association with exposure to potential allergens
or irritants or after stress or exercise.

FELINE BRONCHIAL SYNDROME

Differential diagnosis

Dogs should first be treated for life-threatening
trauma-related problems. Decreased physical activity
­
and cage rest in a 40% oxygen enriched environment is
advised. Oxygen can also be provided with nasal cannulation. Pulmonary contusion will begin to show radiographic resolution after 3–5 days.

Prognosis

Definition/overview
Cough is an infrequent clinical sign in cats. It is fairly
specific for tracheobronchial disease in cats since cough
of cardiac origin is rare. Feline bronchial disease (feline
asthma or bronchitis) is characterized by inflammation
of the lower airways without an obvious identifiable
cause. Many other terms are found in the literature such
as chronic bronchitis, allergic bronchitis, eosinophilic
bronchitis, and bronchial asthma. It is recognized clinically with signs of cough, wheezing, exercise intolerance,
and respiratory distress attributable to airway obstruction caused by bronchial inflammation.

Etiology
Feline asthma is thought to be an allergic disorder based
on the associated tissue pathology and the response to
glucocorticoid drugs, although it might be difficult to distinguish the condition from other types of chronic airway
disease.

Pathophysiology
Clinical signs are related to reversible airway inflammation and obstruction linked to hyperreactivity and
smooth muscle hypertrophy, excessive mucus production (mucous gland hypertrophy) and accumulation,
and bronchial wall edema. These changes are often
reversible. However, chronic inflammation can lead
to severe lower airway obstruction, which causes lung
hyperinflation and air trapping. Lung hyperinflation

K22463_C004.indd 136

Clinical presentation

Includes any disease that can affect the feline airway.
Pulmonary parasitic diseases, including infection with
Aerulostrongylus abstrusus and Dirofilaria immitis (in
endemic regions), will result in similar clinical findings
including eosinophilic airway inflammation.

Diagnosis
Physical examination in the asymptomatic cat can be
normal at rest, but those with active disease will show a
prolonged expiratory phase of breathing with auscultable wheezes or crackles. The classic radiographic pattern
with established disease includes signs of bronchial wall
thickening (doughnuts or railroad tracks) and air trapping (increased lucency and flattening of the diaphragm).
Some cats will have a right middle or some other lung
lobe atelectasis.
The hemogram can range from normal to having an
eosinophilia. Other abnormalities include a stress leukogram, a secondary polycythemia, or hyperglobulinemia.
Fecal examination is recommended as part of the diagnostic work up in order to exclude a parasitic origin for
the eosinophilic infiltration (Aelurostrongylus, Dirofilaria).
Cytologic examination of airway samples, obtained
by BAL or endotracheal wash, generally provides evidence of airway inflammation, with increased numbers
of eosinophils and/or neutrophils. Although a preponderance of eosinophils may be found in fluids from healthy
cats, the number of eosinophils and neutrophils in BAL
fluid has been shown to correlate with disease severity,
both in cats with spontaneous disease and in those with

26/04/16 12:35 am

Respiratory disorders

­experimentally induced bronchial disease. Feline asthmatic disease is primarily characterized by a predominance (as high as 17%) of eosinophils identified in the
BAL fluid. Culture of BAL fluid and PCR for Mycoplasma
detection can be useful, but its presence does not necessarily signify it being the cause of the airway disease.
Feces examination (fecal floatation and Baermann) and
heartworm antibody/antigen testing can help detect
heartworm disease or Toxocara cati and Aerulostrongylus
abstrusus.
Pulmonary function testing is not commonly used in
the diagnostic assessment of cats with bronchial disease.

137

4.24

Management
Stress should be minimized and an oxygen enriched
environment provided when managing any cat with
­
acute respiratory distress. Parenteral therapy with
beta-agonist bronchodilators such as terbutaline
(0.01 mg/kg IV, IM, or SC) and a rapidly acting corticosteroid (e.g. dexamethasone, 0.25 mg/kg IV or IM) should be
administered. Inhaled bronchodilator medication can be
used as well.
Most retrospective studies involving cats with lower
airway disease have documented a beneficial response
to oral or parenteral glucocorticoids and/or bronchodilators. An initial dose of prednisone or prednisolone, beginning at 1–2 mg/kg q24h over a 2-week period followed
by a gradual tapering dose over another 2-week period,
has been shown to be a consistent, reliable, and effective
treatment. Bronchodilators, such as inhaled salbutamol
and albuterol, are very useful to alleviate acute clinical
signs, but as they fail to control airway inflammation,
they should not be used without glucocorticoid drugs.
The use of inhaled medication using a face mask and
spacing chamber (Figure 4.24) is popular. Medications
given via inhalation offer the advantage of providing
high drug concentrations within the the airways while

K22463_C004.indd 137

Figure 4.24 Inhaled steroid therapy for a dog with a chronic
cough using a spacer and face mask (Aerokat*, Trudell Medical
International, Ontario, Canada).

attenuating systemic side-effects. Long-term treatment
­
with inhaled corticosteroids (e.g. fluticasone propionate), and bronchodilators (e.g. albuterol) is the preferred
medication.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (2010) (eds.) Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 6th edn. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.
Johnson LR (2007) (ed.) Respiratory physiology, diagnostics and
diseases. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 37(5):829–1012.
Johnson LR (2014) (ed.) Canine and feline respiratory medicine.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 44(1):1–190.
Johnson LR (2010) (ed.) Clinical Canine and Feline Respiratory
Medicine, 1st edn. Wiley-Blackwell, Ames.
King LG (2004) (ed.) Textbook of Respiratory Diseases in Dogs and
Cats. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.
Luis Fuentes V, Johnson LR, Dennis S (2010) (eds.) BSAVA Manual
of Canine and Feline Cardiorespiratory Medicine, 2nd edn.
British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Gloucester.

26/04/16 12:35 am

This page intentionally left blank

139

Chapter 5
Diseases of the pleural space
J. Brad Case

PNEUMOTHORAX

Table 5.1 Causes of pleural space diseases.

Definition/overview

Pneumothorax
Traumatic closed chest (blunt trauma)
Open chest (penetrating projectiles, bites, automobile)
Spontaneous (bullae, blebs, foreign bodies,
­bronchoesophageal fistula, abscess, bronchiectasis,
pneumonia)
Pyothorax
Pneumonia
Bronchiectasis
Foreign body
Esophageal perforation
Trauma
Surgical
Chest drain
Feline infectious peritonitis/feline leukemia virus
Abscess (common causative agents: Actinomyces spp.,
Nocardia spp., Filifactor spp.)
Chylothorax
Idiopathic
Lung lobe torsion
Neoplasia
Traumatic
Cardiomyopathy
Pericardial disease
Heartworm disease
Lung lobe torsion
Spontaneous
Neoplasia
Pneumonia
Pleural effusion
Surgery
Diaphragmatic herniation
Traumatic
Congenital
Thoracic neoplasia
Hemangiosarcoma
Lymphosarcoma
Osteosarcoma
Chondrosarcoma
Carcinoma
Mesothelioma
Lymphoma and others

Pneumothorax is a common disease among dogs and
cats and is characterized by an accumulation of air in the
pleural space and subsequent restriction to pulmonary
inflation. The result is hypoxemia, which can be severe
in many cases and eventually cause death of the animal.

Etiology
Two broad etiologic categories are recognized in dogs
and cats; traumatic and spontaneous pneumothorax.
Traumatic pneumothorax (closed or open chest) is seen
most commonly after blunt automobile trauma but is also
observed following thoracic penetrating trauma (e.g. bite,
gunshot, porcupine quill wounds). In contrast, spontaneous pneumothorax is not associated with thoracic wall
trauma or any observed inciting cause. Subpleural blebs
(Figure 5.1) and pulmonary bullae are the most common
causes of spontaneous pneumothorax but parasitic, infectious, and neoplastic diseases have also been ­documented.
Disease-specific etiologies are ­summarized in Table 5.1.

5.1

Figure 5.1 Thoracoscopic image of a subpleural bleb (A) in a
dog with spontaneous pneumothorax.

K22463_C005.indd 139

26/04/16 2:08 am

140

Diseases of specific organ systems

Pathophysiology

Diagnosis

Pulmonary expansion and effective gas exchange at the
blood–pulmonary interface is dependent on a negative
intrapleural pressure gradient. With significant pneumothorax this pressure gradient is lost and the lungs do not
expand with air. This in turn limits the transfer of oxygen
and other gases to and from the systemic arterial circulation, ultimately resulting in hypoxemia.

Diagnosis of pneumothorax is made either by visualization of a full-thickness thoracic wall lesion, thoracic radiography, or thoracocentesis. However, it important that
the examining clinician prioritize stabilization of the
patient prior to thoracic radiography, as sudden stress
can exacerbate the condition and lead to rapid deterioration of the patient. Typical survey radiographic findings include regions of radiolucency in the pleural cavity,
which abut retracted lung lobes, and dorsal elevation of
the cardiac silhouette off of the sternum on the lateral
projection (Figures 5.2–5.4). CT (Figure 5.5) is useful for
identifying accompanying bronchiectasis, neoplasia, and,
in some cases, pulmonary foreign bodies. However, in
most instances of pneumothorax it is unnecessary.

Clinical presentation
Dogs and cats with pneumothorax typically present with
varying degrees of dyspnea, tachypnea, and restlessness.
Dyspnea in animals with acute trauma should raise the
index of suspicion for pneumothorax and prompt support, therapy, and diagnostics should be performed. In
most cases of closed traumatic pneumothorax, an obvious thoracic wound or communication with the pleural
space will not be present. Furthermore, up to 50% of dogs
with traumatic pneumothorax will also have significant
concurrent musculoskeletal injuries. Animals with spontaneous pneumothorax often present with mild to moderate dyspnea and tachypnea with no other concurrent
clinical signs.

Differential diagnosis
See Tables 5.2 and 5.3.

Table 5.2 Differential diagnosis of pleural versus pulmonary
parenchymal and vascular diseases.
Reduction of thoracic capacity
Pleural effusions:
Hydrothorax
Hemothorax
Chylothorax
Pyothorax
Neoplastic
Inflammatory
Pneumothorax
Diaphragmatic rupture/hernia
Cardiac enlargement
Intrathoracic masses
Abdominal masses/fluid
Loss of pulmonary exchange capacity
Bronchopneumonia
Pulmonary edema
Pulmonary hemorrhage/contusion
Metastatic neoplasia
Pulmonary emphysema
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Pulmonary thromboembolism
Paraquat poisoning

K22463_C005.indd 140

Management
Initial stabilization of the patient is essential r­ egardless of
the ultimate management strategy (medical or ­surgical).
Oxygen supplementation is administered and ­therapeutic
thoracocentesis performed. The patient is then monitored
for signs of worsening dyspnea. If dyspnea is progressive,
Table 5.3 Types and causes of pleural effusion.
Transudate
Hypoproteinemia (gut or urine loss, severe liver disease)
Modified (protein-rich) transudate
Congestive cardiac failure, particularly in cats
Neoplasia (particularly cranial mediastinum, thoracic wall)
Lung lobe torsion
Diaphragmatic rupture and incarceration of liver
Hemothorax
Trauma
Coagulopathies
Neoplasia
Anticoagulant rodenticide
Chylothorax
Trauma
Neoplasia
Congestive heart failure, especially in cats
Heartworm disease
Infections
Lung lobe torsion
Idiopathic
Pyothorax
Nocardia spp
Bacteroides spp
Tuberculosis
Actinomyces spp
Inflammatory
Feline infectious peritonitis
Acute pancreatitis
Feline pansteatitis

26/04/16 1:54 am

Diseases of the pleural space

5.2

Figure 5.2 Lateral thoracic radiograph of a dog with a
moderate pneumothorax showing cardiac elevation (A) and
cranial lobe retraction (B).
5.3

141

5.4

Figure 5.4 Lateral thoracic radiograph of a dog with a severe
pneumothorax showing cardiac elevation (A) and minimal
aeration of the pulmonary parenchyma (B).
5.5

Figure 5.5 Transverse computed tomography scan of a dog
with pneumothorax. Note the free gas in the pleural space (A)
and retraction of the lungs (B).

Figure 5.3 Ventrodorsal thoracic radiograph of a dog with
pneumothorax demonstrating caudal lung lobe retraction (A).

K22463_C005.indd 141

a thoracostomy tube is placed. In the case of flail or open
chest pneumothorax, the wound is débrided and repaired
to allow stabilization of the patient. In most instances
of closed traumatic pneumothorax, ­
intermittent
needle ­
thoracocentesis is effective in ­
resolving the
­pneumothorax. If frequent, repetitive a
­ spiration of air
from the pleural cavity is required, a chest tube should be
placed (Figures 5.6a, b). Thoracostomy tubes can be aspirated ­intermittently or continuously depending on the
production of air. The author prefers a continuous negative pressure approach if repeat a
­ spiration is required
more frequently than every 2 hours. A negative pressure

26/04/16 1:54 am

142

Diseases of specific organ systems

5.7

5.6

Figure 5.7 Video-assisted partial lung lobectomy from the dog
in Figure 5.1.
a
5.8

a
b
Figures 5.6a, b Extra- and intrathoracic views of appropriate
chest tube placement.

between 2 and 4 cm H2O is effective in most cases. If pneumothorax is continuous and persists longer than 2–3
days, surgical e­ xploration and complete or partial lung
lobectomy (Figures 5.7–5.9) of the pathologic lung lobe is
indicated.
Dogs with spontaneous pneumothorax present a significant challenge and most often require surgical lung
lobectomy for definitive resolution of the ­pneumothorax.
Although many cases of spontaneous pneumothorax can
resolve temporarily with medical treatment, recurrence
is very common. Surgical exploration of the thoracic cavity is performed via a median sternotomy or exploratory
thoracoscopy. Intercostal thoracotomy does not allow
evaluation of both hemithoraces, which is necessary in
most spontaneous ­pneumothorax cases.

K22463_C005.indd 142

b
Figure 5.8 Thoracoscopic image of a pulmonary bulla before
(a) and after (b) a stapled partial lung lobectomy.

26/04/16 1:54 am

Diseases of the pleural space

5.9

143

ultimately penetrating the pulmonary parenchyma.
Other mechanisms of infection include esophageal perforation, hematogenous seeding, extension from a pneumonic infection, penetrating trauma, chest tube stoma,
and surgical site infections. Often, the exact mechanism
of infection is not identified. Disease-specific etiologies
are summarized in Table 5.1.

Pathophysiology

Figure 5.9 Intraoperative leak test to confirm the presence of a
leaking lobe.

Prognosis
Short-term prognosis for pneumothorax in dogs and cats
is generally good provided that emergent and effective
treatment is instituted. Long-term prognosis is dependent
on the specific pathologic condition causing the pneumothorax. Spontaneous pneumothorax treated surgically is
associated with a 10% mortality and 3% recurrence rate,
whereas medically treated dogs have a 50% mortality and
recurrence rate.

PYOTHORAX
Definition/overview
Pyothorax, taken from the Greek word ‘py’, meaning
pus, and ‘thorac’, pertaining to the chest, is a serious and
life-threatening disease. The disease is characterized by
accumulation of septic exudate within the thoracic cavity. Most cases of pyothorax are bacterial in origin; however, fungal pyothorax also occurs. Pyothorax is typically
seen in young field dogs such as the German Shorthaired
Pointer and is consistently more common in males.
Pyothorax is commonly diagnosed in cats, and it can
also be seen associated with a variety of diseases such as
feline infectious peritonitis.

Etiology
Aerobic and anaerobic microbes are causative in
most cases of pyothorax and many infections are
­polymicrobial. Actinomyces and actinomyces-like ­bacteria
(e.g. Nocardia spp. and Filifactor spp.) are also r­ esponsible
for infections and can be associated with migrating grass
awns. Migrating grass foreign bodies are thought to
migrate through the respiratory system after inhalation,

K22463_C005.indd 143

In addition to restrictive pulmonary function due to fluid
build up within the pleural space, bacterial pathogens
release endotoxins that act as pyrogens. This can lead to
a myriad of untoward systemic sequelae including systemic inflammatory response syndrome and multiple
organ dysfunction/failure. Furthermore, inoculated foreign material within the thoracic cavity presents a significant challenge for clearance of infection. Specifically,
foreign bodies can wall themselves off, thus preventing
penetration and clearance by the immune system. The
persistence of foreign material within the chest cavity is
a common cause of long-term failure and recurrence.

Clinical presentation
Most dogs and cats with pyothorax are dull, lethargic, hyporexic, often febrile, and have differing degrees of restrictive dyspnea. In severe cases, open-mouth breathing,
abducted elbows, and cyanosis may be observed. Clinical
examination reveals variable findings including elevated
rectal temperature, diminished lung and heart sounds,
and potentially penetrating thoracic wounds (e.g. dog bite).

Differential diagnosis
See Tables 5.2 and 5.3.

Diagnosis
The definitive diagnosis of pyothorax is made by
­thoracocentesis and identification of a septic s­ uppurative
exudate on cytologic examination (Figure 5.10). Actinomyces
is gram positive and non-acid-fast, while Nocardia is gram
positive and partially acid-fast. Culture and susceptibility
testing are necessary for species ­identification and for
evaluation of appropriate ­antimicrobial therapy. Other
important clinical diagnostics include CBC, serum biochemistry, urinalysis, and 2-view thoracic radiography.
Thoracic radiographs demonstrate increased radiopacity
in the pleural space, with concomitant dorsal elevation
and scalloping of lung lobes on the lateral view. Pleural
fissure lines are easily seen and the cardiac silhouette is
typically obscured (Figures 5.11a, b). Positive-contrast CT
is also recommended when available. This is helpful in

26/04/16 1:54 am

144

Diseases of specific organ systems

5.10

cases where radiopaque foreign bodies may be present,
as associated regions of tissue inflammation will typically
demonstrate enhancement.

Management

Figure 5.10 Cytologic example of a septic exudate from a dog
with pyothorax. (Courtesy H. Wamsley)

5.11

a

b
Figures 5.11a, b Lateral (a) and dorsoventral (b) thoracic
radiographs of a dog with pyothorax.

K22463_C005.indd 144

Antimicrobial therapy is the cornerstone of treatment of
pyothorax in dogs and cats. Broad-spectrum, empirical
antibiotic therapy is indicated early and for an extended
period of time (usually 6–8 weeks) in most cases. Popular
and effective combinations of antibiotics include (1) a
potentiated penicillin or (2) cephalosporin in conjunction
with clindamycin or metronidazole. Actinomyces is most
sensitive to penicillins while Nocardia is often sensitive
to sulfonamides. Other antibiotics can also be used effectively, as most infections are not particularly resistant.
Antibiotic susceptibility testing should be utilized to
guide therapy once results are available.
In addition to antimicrobial therapy, removal of septic
fluid and any foreign or necrotic material is important,
as treatment failure and recurrence may result if this
is not performed. Thoracostomy drain placement either
unilaterally or bilaterally is necessary in the initial
treatment of pyothorax. Thoracostomy drains are used
to drain and lavage the pleural space, which facilitates
clearance of debris and septic material. Failure to place
a thoracostomy drain is associated with an unacceptable
level of treatment failure. Pleural lavage is performed
using sterile physiologic 0.9% saline at 10–20 ml/kg up to
4 times daily. The addition of heparin to the lavage fluid
at 5–10 U/ml has been recommended and theoretically
may result in diminished adhesion formation.
Surgical intervention may be important in dogs with
masses or cases where a foreign body is present or highly
suspected (e.g. Actinomyces infection). Median sternotomy
is indicated for exploration of both hemithoraces in cases
of bilateral pyothorax when a cause is not identified or if
medical treatment failure occurs. If a mass lesion is seen
or if pus is limited to a single hemithorax, an intercostal thoracotomy may be an appropriate alternative to
median sternotomy. Thoracic surgery regardless of the
approach is challenging and marred with potential complications and should be performed only by experienced
surgeons.
The author prefers exploratory thoracoscopy
(Figures 5.12–5.14) as a diagnostic and therapeutic procedure in most cases of pyothorax. Exploratory thoracoscopy utilizes two to three 5.5 mm portals to explore,
débride, and biopsy pleural and mediastinal tissues,
and is used to perform thorough lavage of both hemithoraces ­followed by video-assisted thoracostomy drain
placement. A single thoracostomy drain is used after

26/04/16 1:54 am

Diseases of the pleural space

5.12

145

exploratory thoracoscopy as the mediastinal tissues are
well débrided and therefore do not isolate one side of the
thorax from the other. The efficacy of this treatment has
not been reported in the veterinary literature, but experience and anecdotal reports are supportive.

Prognosis
Overall prognosis for pyothorax in dogs and cats is good
as long as appropriate and prudent medical treatment is
instituted. The long-term success rate for dogs ­managed
medically ranges from 30 to 70% while dogs managed
­surgically experience a more consistent long-term s­ uccess
rate between 70 and 80%.

5.13

CHYLOTHORAX
Definition/overview
Chylothorax is defined as a pathologic accumulation of
chyle within the thoracic cavity. It is a relatively rare disease in dogs and cats, but is associated with an untoward
outcome in many cases, despite treatment.

Etiology

5.14

There are a number of potential causes of chylothorax
including traumatic thoracic duct rupture, neoplasia,
cardiomyopathy, heartworm disease, restrictive pericarditis, and lung lobe torsion. However, most cases appear
to be idiopathic. Because the exact cause is often unidentified despite appropriate diagnostic testing, target-based
treatment can be challenging. Disease-specific etiologies
are summarized in Table 5.1.

Pathophysiology

Figures 5.12–5.14 Dog undergoing thoracoscopic treatment
for pyothorax. (5.12) Purulent fluid (C) and fibrin (B) in
the cranial thorax. The pulmonary pleura is inflamed (A).
(5.13) Thoracoscopic view of the cranial mediastinum after
mediastinal débridement (B) and sternal lymph node (D)
biopsy. The right internal thoracic artery (A), inflamed dorsal
mediastinum (E), and left cranial lung lobe (C) are also visible.
(5.14) Thoracoscopic view of the cranial mediastinum. Note the
fibrinous plaques (A) and left cranial lung lobe erythema (B).

K22463_C005.indd 145

Direct injury to the thoracic duct can occur secondary
to trauma or neoplastic disease. Disease processes that
increase right-sided cardiac pressure, such as cardiomyopathy or restrictive pericarditis, also can induce
chylothorax by causing extravasation of lymph from
the lymphatic system. Similarly, lymphaticovenous
obstructive diseases such as mediastinal lymphoma
­
can cause chylothorax. Chylothorax induces significant
inflammation within the pleural cavity, ultimately resulting in restrictive pleural fibrosis. Consequently, early and
effective treatment is indicated to minimize the risk and
severity of pleural fibrosis.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs typical of pleural effusion are seen in dogs
and cats with chylothorax. Specifically, restrictive dyspnea, tachycardia, lethargy, and hyporexia are commonly
reported. Reduced or absent bronchovesicular sounds on

26/04/16 1:54 am

146

Diseases of specific organ systems

thoracic auscultation is a common finding. In chronic
cases, poor body condition and cough may be observed.
Among dogs, Afghan Hounds, Shetland Sheepdogs, and
Shiba Inus are overrepresented.

5.15

Differential diagnosis
See Tables 5.2 and 5.3.

Diagnosis
Chylous fluid has a milky white-to-pink gross appearance (Figure 5.15) and is characterized as a modified
transudate. The definitive diagnosis of chylothorax is
based on pleural fluid analysis. Distinguishing between
chyle and pseudochyle is typically done by measuring fluid triglyceride levels then comparing those
with serum triglyceride levels. Dogs and cats with a
pseudochylous effusion will have equivalent fluid and
serum triglyceride values, whereas patients with true
chylous effusion will have fluid triglyceride levels significantly higher than serum levels. Other bench top
tests that can be performed to help differentiate a chylous ­effusion from a pseudochylous effusion include a
positive ether clearance test and positive Sudan black
uptake by ­chylomicrons. Cytology of pleural fluid is
important to rule out other potential diseases such as
neoplasia (Figure 5.15).
Thoracic radiographs demonstrate increased radiopacity in the pleural space, with concomitant dorsal elevation and scalloping of lung lobes on the lateral view
(Figure 5.16). Pleural fissure lines are easily seen and the
cardiac silhouette is typically obscured.
Thoracic ultrasonography (Figure 5.17) can also
be used to diagnose the presence of free pleural fluid
and may be preferred in emergent cases, as it can
be ­
performed ­
without significant restraint in most
cases. Ultrasonography also allows for diagnostic and
­therapeutic image-guided thoracocentesis, which can be
rapidly performed in emergency situations. Pleural fluid
is identified as a hypo- to anechoic signal on ­ultrasound.
Small volumes of fluid may not be easily visible using
ultrasound. Presence of a thin hyperechoic pleural
­fissure line immediately adjacent to the body wall with
­associated gas shadow is inconsistent with significant
pleural effusion.
CT lymphangiography is the procedure of choice for
imaging of the thoracic duct (Figure 5.18) and cysterna
chyli (Figure 5.19). While it is not necessary to perform CT
lymphangiography to make the diagnosis of chylothorax,
it is an important diagnostic test in the presurgical evaluation of patients with chylothorax.

K22463_C005.indd 146

Figure 5.15 Pleural fluid. Gross appearance and cytology in
a dog with chylothorax secondary to lymphangiosarcoma.
Note the neoplastic characteristics of the cells: high nuclear
to cytoplasmic ration, multiple nucleoli, and anisokaryosis.
(Courtesy H. Wamsley)
5.16

Figure 5.16 Lateral thoracic radiograph of a dog with recurrent
pleural effusion 8 months after thoracic duct ligation and
pericardectomy. This dog was eventually diagnosed with
lymphangiosarcoma. Note the retracted lung lobes (arrow) and
pleural fluid (*).
5.17

Figure 5.17 Thoracic ultrasonogram of a dog with pleural
effusion. Note the hypoechoic shadow and linear hyperechoic
fibrin strands indicative of pleural fluid. (Courtesy M. Winter)

26/04/16 1:54 am

Diseases of the pleural space

147

5.18

5.20

Figure 5.18 Transverse and sagittal computed tomography
lymphangiography has been performed. Note the thoracic duct
medial and dorsal to the descending aorta (arrows).

5.19
Figure 5.20 Intraoperative image of the thoracic duct
subsequent to ligation. Note the azygous vein just dorsal
to the ligated thoracic duct.

Figure 5.19 Transverse and sagittal computed tomography
lymphangiography has been performed. Note the thoracic duct
(sagittal view, left arrow) and cysterna chyli (both projections,
right arrow on sagittal view).

5.21

Management
Conservative management of dogs and cats with chylothorax is rarely rewarding and is associated with a high
degree of treatment failure. Medical options include feeding a low-fat/high-fiber diet to minimize the absorption
and flow of chyle within the lymphatics. Nutraceuticals,
such as bioflavonoids (e.g. Rutin, 20–50 mg/kg q8h), can
also be supplemented to enhance macrophage activity.
Other medications such as somatostatin and octreotide
have also been used. Serial thoracocentesis is frequently
required in medically managed dogs and cats with chylothorax. Because prolonged exposure of the visceral
pleura to chylous fluid can result in pleural fibrosis,
medical management should be attempted with caution.
Owners should be counseled about the risks of pleural
fibrosis at the time of diagnosis.
Surgical management is recommended in dogs and
cats with idiopathic chylothorax, as it is associated with
the best chance of treatment success. A number of surgical
treatments have been recommended, but the most commonly performed are thoracic duct ligation (Figure 5.20),
in combination with cysterna chyli ablation (Figures
5.21, 5.22) and/or pericardectomy, and thoracic cavity
omentalization.

K22463_C005.indd 147

Figure 5.21 Intraoperative image of the cysterna chyli during
ablation surgery. Note the dilated milky white appearance of
the cysterna (arrow). This dog was fed cream prior to surgery to
enhance visualization during the procedure.

5.22

Figure 5.22 Dilated intestinal lymphatics (arrow) following oral
cream administration in the dog in Figure 5.21.

26/04/16 1:54 am

148

Diseases of specific organ systems

Prognosis

Differential diagnosis

Prognosis with medical management alone is successful
in less than 25% of cases. Surgical success varies among
treatments but in general ranges from 75% to 85% in
the short and medium term. Long-term resolution of
chylothorax is expected in about 70% of dogs treated
surgically.

See Tables 5.2 and 5.3.

LUNG LOBE TORSION
Definition/overview
Lung lobe torsion occurs when a lung lobe becomes twisted
about its longitudinal axis so as to obstruct the pulmonary
vasculature and the bronchus. In most cases the pulmonary
artery is patent. Lung lobe torsion is a relatively uncommon disease. Male dogs and those with a narrow and deep
chest appear to be predisposed to lung lobe torsion. Afghan
Hounds and Pug dogs appear to be overrepresented. Lung
lobe torsion does occur in the cat, but it is rare.

Etiology
The precise etiology of lung lobe torsion in many cases
is unknown and it is therefore referred to simply as
spontaneous. In some dogs the condition may be seen
in conjunction with other pathology including pulmonary neoplasia and chylothorax. Any disease process
that results in collapse of the airway and which increases
mobility of a particular lobe may predispose that lobe to
torsion. Examples of associated diseases include bronchomalacia and bronchial collapse, pulmonary neoplasia,
chylothorax, and alteration of normal anatomy due to
previous thoracic surgery (e.g. lung lobectomy). Diseasespecific etiologies are summarized in Table 5.1.

Pathophysiology
When a lung lobe undergoes torsion, the venous and
­lymphatic outflow becomes obstructed, resulting in fluid
congestion and distension of the affected lobe. With time,
the fluid accumulation becomes severe, eventually resulting in necrosis and pleural effusion formation. A low ventilation/perfusion mismatch results but may not be clinically
apparent if the remaining lung lobes are healthy.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs include coughing, respiratory difficulty,
tachypnea, lethargy, and hyporexia. Respiratory signs
can be severe, especially if significant pleural effusion
exists. In some cases, a history of previous thoracic surgery may be known, but in many instances no significant
medical history exists.

K22463_C005.indd 148

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is typically made via thoracic radiography (Figures 5.23, 5.24) or CT (Figures 5.25, 5.26).
Survey radiographic findings may vary depending
on the presence of pleural fluid and chronicity of the
disease. In early cases without significant pleural effusion, or ­following thoracocentesis, consolidation with
or ­without the presence of air bronchograms may be
­evident. In more chronic cases, complete consolidation of
the lung lobe with blunting of the pulmonary ­bronchus
may occur. CT is useful in identifying obstructed or narrowed bronchi and is more sensitive than survey radiography for detection of lung lobe torsion.
Pleural fluid analysis typically reveals a modified
transudate, which may be chylous.

Management
Surgical ligation and excision of the affected lung lobe
is the recommended treatment. Dogs and cats with
lung lobe torsion are stabilized prior to surgical lung
lobectomy. Stabilization usually requires therapeutic
thoracocentesis and IV fluid replacement. Any electrolyte or acid–base disruptions should be corrected prior
to anesthesia and surgery. Dogs and cats undergoing
­thoracotomy should have a preoperative hematocrit of
at least 30% (0.3 l/l), as hemoglobin is the most significant ­contributor to blood oxygen content, and hypoxemia and blood loss can be significant with thoracic
surgery.
Lung lobectomy can be performed via a video-assisted
thoracic approach (Figure 5.27), median sternotomy, or
video-assisted or intercostal t­horacotomy (Figure 5.28).
Video-assisted thoracic surgery is the author’s preferred
approach as exploration of the pulmonary parenchyma
is possible and the procedure can be performed with minimal tissue injury and postoperative pain. Regardless
of the surgical approach, ligation of the v
­ ascular pedicle (without derotation of the lung lobe) using a
­triple-row surgical stapler or suture ­ligation is performed
(Figure 5.29). Patients are monitored and supported in a
critical care facility postoperatively.

Prognosis
Prognosis is dependent on the underlying disease p
­ rocess
and the experience and ability of the anesthesia and
­surgery services. Mortality rates have been reported as
high as 40%, but Pug dogs appear to have a much higher
survival rate.

26/04/16 1:54 am

Diseases of the pleural space

5.23

149

5.25

5.24

5.26

Figures 5.23–5.26 Dog with lung lobe torsion. (5.23) Lateral
thoracic radiograph. Note the pleural effusion (left arrow)
and blunt ended bronchus (right arrow). (5.24) Ventrodorsal
thoracic radiograph. Note the consolidated right middle lung
lobe with blunted bronchus (arrow). (5.25) Transverse computed
tomography view. The occluded bronchus and consolidated
lung lobe are easily visualized (arrow). (5.26) Sagittal computed
tomography view. The occluded bronchus is demonstrated (arrow).

DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIATION
Definition/overview
Pleural–peritoneal diaphragmatic herniation results
when the diaphragm is ruptured or when an abnormal
communication of the peritoneal and pleural cavities
exists. The diaphragm is composed of a large central

K22463_C005.indd 149

tendon, which originates from the sternal, costal, and
lumbar musculature. In health, the diaphragm maintains
three normal ostia: the aortic, vena cava, and esophageal
hiatus. Peritoneal–pericardial diaphragmatic hernias are
not true pleural–peritoneal hernias as the communication exists only between the peritoneum and pericardial
spaces.

26/04/16 1:54 am

150

Diseases of specific organ systems

5.27

5.28

5.29

Figures 5.27–5.29 Same dog as in Figures 5.23–5.26. (5.27) Video-assisted thoracic surgical view of the consolidated right middle
lung lobe (thickest arrow), which was adhered to the chest wall. The heart (middle thickness arrow) and lungs (thinnest arrows) are
retracted to the right of the image. (5.28) Intraoperative view of the torsed lung lobe (arrow) during intercostal thoracotomy just
prior to lung lobectomy. (5.29) Intraoperative view of the ligated bronchus (arrow) following lung lobectomy.

Etiology
Diaphragmatic hernias are broadly classified as congenital or acquired, with acquired being most common.
Congenital diaphragmatic hernias are rare and typically
result from failure of the lumbar musculature to fuse.
These hernias are typically located in the dorsolateral
region of the diaphragm. Acquired diaphragmatic hernias are seen commonly following blunt trauma such as
automobile associated injury. Traumatic diaphragmatic
herniation can develop in any part of the diaphragm.
Tears can be multiple or single, large or small, and radial
or longitudinal. Disease-specific etiologies are summarized in Table 5.1.

Pathophysiology
The pathophysiologic effects of diaphragmatic herniation depend on the severity of the hernia, chronicity,
and presence of concurrent injuries. The diaphragm
plays an integral role in ventilation and oxygenation

K22463_C005.indd 150

by altering intrapleural pressure and volume during
respiration. Injury to the diaphragm impairs this
­
­function. Furthermore, with herniation of viscera (liver
most commonly), compression of the pulmonary pleura
and ­pleural vasculature results in compressive atelectasia and venous impairment. The end result is hypoxemia
and reduced cardiac output. Concurrent rib fractures
cause pain, which further reduces ventilatory capacity
and exacerbates hypoxemia. Herniation of intestine into
the pleural space can result in intestinal obstruction and
intestinal ischemia.

Clinical presentation
The clinical presentation for dogs and cats with diaphragmatic herniation is variable and can range from minimal
or no clinical signs to severe dyspnea and hypovolemic
shock. It is important to remember that small diaphragmatic tears may not elicit significant clinical signs and

26/04/16 1:54 am

Diseases of the pleural space

may go undetected until herniation of abdominal viscera
occurs. This may take years in some cases. Thus, diaphragmatic injury should be considered even in dogs and cats
without respiratory signs ­following ­significant thoracic
trauma. Dogs with herniated ­gastrointestinal (GI) organs
may be obstructed and will often present with vomiting
and anorexia.
Physical examination may reveal concurrent soft tissue and orthopedic injuries, reduced abdominal organ
content, or minimal to absent bronchovesicular and
heart sounds.

Differential diagnosis
See Tables 5.2 and 5.3.

Diagnosis
Survey thoracic radiography is the most commonly
­performed diagnostic procedure and is very sensitive
for diagnosing herniation of peritoneal contents into
the pleural space (Figures 5.30, 5.31). Typical radiographic findings include retracted pulmonary parenchyma, ­presence of increased soft tissue opacity in the
pleural cavity, loss of normal cardiac silhouette, presence of ­gas-filled viscera in the pleural cavity, loss of a
normal hepatic shadow, and cranial gastric axis shift.
Contrast abdominal radiography can be performed
to help ­identify ­intestinal herniation and obstruction
(Figures 5.32, 5.33).
CT is also useful and is more sensitive at detection of
small diaphragmatic hernias with minimal or no herniation of GI viscera (Figures 5.34, 5.35).
Arterial blood gas analysis and calculation of the
­alveolar–arterial oxygen gradient is helpful in diagnosing hypoxemia.

Management
Hypoxemic and hypovolemic patients should be resuscitated and stabilized on an emergency basis. Replacement
IV fluid therapy and increased inspired oxygen content
can be started immediately. Most dogs and cats will
respond well to fluid therapy, but response to increased
inspired oxygen may be poor due to the low ventilation–
perfusion mismatch that frequently exists. Reduction
of herniated organs and repair of the diaphragm are
required before significant improvement in oxygenation
will occur.
Diaphragmatic herniorrhaphy by laparotomy (Figures
5.36–5.38) or laparoscopy (Figures 5.39, 5.40) following
reduction of herniated viscera is the d
­ efinitive treatment for pleural–peritoneal ­diaphragmatic ­herniation.
Adjunctive surgical procedures such as ­
resection and

K22463_C005.indd 151

151

anastomosis of devitalized bowel or liver lobectomy for
refractory hemorrhage may also be indicated.

Prognosis
Prognosis for dogs and cats with traumatic diaphragmatic
herniation is good to excellent, with overall survival
around 90%. Dogs and cats with traumatic diaphragmatic
hernias undergoing surgery without effective resuscitation and support have a higher mortality.

THORACIC NEOPLASIA
Definition/overview
Thoracic neoplasia is common in aged dogs and cats. The
result in most cases is production of malignant pleural effusion and respiratory difficulty. Space-occupying
masses can also impair normal respiratory effort and
function. Thoracic neoplasia is almost exclusively malignant, but effective treatment can be accomplished in
many cases depending on the owner’s expectations and
the biology of the particular disease.

Etiology
Thoracic neoplasia is most commonly mesenchymal
or epithelial and can originate from the ribs, pleura,
lungs, mediastinum, thymus, lymph nodes, pericardium,
heart, trachea, and esophagus. Mediastinal lymphoma
and lymphangiosarcoma are also commonly diagnosed.
Disease-specific etiologies are summarized in Table 5.1.

Pathophysiology
Thoracic neoplasia commonly results in malignant pleural effusion, while pericardial and cardiac neoplasms
frequently engender pericardial effusion with or without pleural effusion. Consequently, respiratory and diastolic cardiac function are compromised in affected dogs
and cats. Moderate to marked volumes of pleural space
fluid cause restriction of the pulmonary parenchyma,
which results in hypoxemia. Excessive pericardial effusion or m
­ echanical compression of the right cardiac
chambers by a mass results in tamponade and diastolic
failure.

Clinical presentation
Dogs with thoracic neoplasms can present in significant
distress depending on the location and size of the mass
as well as the location and volume of malignant effusion.
Common clinical signs include dyspnea, coughing, lethargy, and hyporexia. Cough is usually associated with a

26/04/16 1:54 am

152

Diseases of specific organ systems

5.30

5.32

5.31

5.33

Figures 5.30–5.33 Dog with a diaphragmatic hernia. (5.30) Lateral thoracic radiograph. Note the cranial displacement of the gastric
axis and gas-filled viscus in the pleural cavity. (5.31) Ventrodorsal thoracic radiograph. Note the loss of liver shadow and the gasfilled viscus in the pleural cavity. (5.32) Contrast lateral abdominal radiograph. This dog had persistent emesis, which was thought to
be secondary to intestinal obstruction. Contrast was hung up in the duodenum due to herniation and occlusion of the orad jejunum.
Note the absence of a splenic shadow. (5.33) Contrast ventrodorsal abdominal radiograph.

lesion that compresses a bronchus. In some cases, cyanosis and syncope may be reported. Dogs and cats with
thoracic wall tumors may have a visible or palpable mass

K22463_C005.indd 152

present on physical examination. Cardiothoracic auscultation may reveal diminished or absent bronchovesicular
or cardiac sounds.

26/04/16 1:54 am

Diseases of the pleural space

5.34

153

5.36

5.37

5.35

5.38

Figures 5.34, 5.35 Dog with a traumatic ventral diaphragmatic
rupture. Sagittal (5.34) and coronal (5.35) computed
tomography scans. Note the diaphragmatic defect and omental
fat streaking into the thoracic cavity.

K22463_C005.indd 153

Figure 5.36–5.38 Intraoperative views of the dog in
Figures 5.30–5.33. (5.36) Note the herniated colon and
obstructed erythematous jejunum. (5.37) Note that the bowel
has been reduced and the herniated spleen is now visible. (5.38)
Note that all of the abdominal viscera has been reduced.

26/04/16 1:55 am

154

Diseases of specific organ systems

5.39

5.41

5.40

5.42

Figures 5.39, 5.40 Laparoscopic views of the dog in
Figures 5.30–5.33. (5.39) The greater omentum is herniated
into the pleural space. (5.40) An intracorporeal knotless
herniorrhaphy is being performed.

Differential diagnosis
See Tables 5.2 and 5.3.

Diagnosis
Cytologic analysis of malignant effusions is often inconclusive either due to lack of representative cells in the
sample or because of similarity of reactive mesothelial
cells to malignant mesothelial cells. Routine blood work
is typically nonspecific. Radiographic and echocardiographic imaging usually reveals the presence of pleural
and/or pericardial effusion. Mediastinal, pulmonary,
and thoracic wall masses can be identified with thoracic
radiography (Figures 5.41–5.44), but masses within the
pericardial space typically are only seen via echocardiography. Three-dimensional imaging with CT or MRI
is ideal for imaging the thoracic cavity (Figure 5.45).
Cytology obtained from ultrasound-guided fine-needle
aspirates may be useful, but tissue biopsy and histopathology are often essential for a definitive diagnosis
(Figures 5.46–5.48).

K22463_C005.indd 154

Figures 5.41, 5.42 Dog with severe malignant pleural effusion.
Lateral (5.41) and ventrodorsal (5.42) thoracic radiographs. This
dog was diagnosed with pleural mesothelioma.

26/04/16 1:55 am

Diseases of the pleural space

5.43

155

5.45

5.44
5.46

Figures 5.45, 5.46 Dog with a noninvasive thymoma. (5.45)
Transverse computed tomographic view. Note the thymoma
(center of image), left subclavian artery, left internal thoracic
artery, brachiocephalic artery, and cranial vena cava. (5.46) A
thoracoscopic pleural biopsy has been performed. Note the
pleural nodule above the biopsy site.

Management

Figures 5.43, 5.44 Dog with severe malignant pericardial
effusion. Lateral (5.43) and ventrodorsal (5.44) thoracic
radiographs. This dog was diagnosed with a right auricular
hemangiosarcoma.

K22463_C005.indd 155

Initial medical treatment may include thoracocentesis,
pericardiocentesis, IV fluid resuscitation, and oxygen
supplementation. Tissue diagnosis and staging is recommended (although sometimes not possible) before prescribing a treatment plan. Surgery is often indicated for
a variety of neoplastic processes, and chemotherapy may
also be indicated depending on the biologic behavior of
the cancer.

26/04/16 1:55 am

156

Diseases of specific organ systems

5.47

Prognosis
Prognosis is dependent on the clinical health of the subject, the specific neoplasm, and the treatment elected. In
general, thoracic neoplasms have a poor long-term prognosis, but disease-free intervals and survival times up to
years can be achieved in some cases. Prognosis should be
based on histopathology if possible, as some diseases (e.g.
idiopathic pleural effusion) can mimic malignant thoracic neoplasms.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Monnet E (2013) Small Animal Soft Tissue Surgery, 1st edn.
Wiley-Blackwell, Ames.
Tobias KM, Johnston SA (2012) Veterinary Surgery: Small Animal,
1st edn. Elsevier Saunders, St Louis.
Figure 5.47 Pericardioscopic view of a massive right atrial
appendage hemangiosarcoma that is compressing the right
atrium.
5.48

Figure 5.48 Pericardioscopic view of a dog with multiple
small heart base nodules. These nodules were not seen on
echocardiography or preoperative computed tomography. The
diagnosis was pericardial and pleural mesothelioma.

K22463_C005.indd 156

26/04/16 1:56 am

157

Chapter 6
Approach to thoracic radiographs
L. Abbigail Granger

BASICS OF THORACIC RADIOGRAPHY

6.1

Technique and positioning
Choosing thoracic views
At least two orthogonal views (right or left lateral and
ventrodorsal or dorsoventral views) should be obtained
for each thoracic study. Evidence supports obtaining at
least three views because of the effect recumbency has
on lesion conspicuity. This is true especially when clinical suspicion is present for aspiration or bronchopneumonia, pulmonary bullae, any unilateral or nondiffuse
pulmonary disease, or when radiographs are obtained
as a screening for metastasis. As exact diagnosis is often
unknown at the time of imaging due to overlapping clinical signs, many radiologists advocate three- or four-view
thoracic studies as standard of care.

Positioning
To obtain a lateral view, position the animal in right or
left recumbency and extend the forelimbs to remove
superimposition over the cranial thorax. To avoid obliquity, a radiolucent positioning device such as a foam
wedge is often needed at the level of the sternum, especially in deep chested dogs. Rely on palpable landmarks
to appropriately center and collimate each view. Easily
palpable landmarks include the thoracic inlet and the
proximal aspect of the 13th ribs, which reliably define
the cranial and caudal margins of the thorax. The
­collimated beam should be centered at the caudal angle
of the scapula, which is typically in the same plane
as the central heart when the forelimbs are extended
(Figures 6.1a–c). The ventrodorsal or dorsoventral
view should also be obtained with forelimbs extended.
Patients can be positioned in a radiolucent trough for a
ventrodorsal view or directly on the radiology table for
a dorsoventral view (Figures 6.2a–d). Sandbags, tape,
and radiolucent wedges should be used to properly
position patients and avoid personnel exposure. The
entire thorax should be included in each view, including the spine and the sternum. In some cases, patients

K22463_C006.indd 157

b

a

c
Figures 6.1a–c Palpable landmarks and positioning for a
lateral thoracic view. The caudal angle of the scapula is a
reliable landmark for centering the beam over the heart (a, b).
To correctly use this landmark and to limit superimposition over
the cranial lungs, the forelimbs must be extended (c). In most
cases, a foam wedge is essential to preventing obliquity.
Radiographically, the caudal angle of the scapula (dashed black
line) is superimposed near the center of the heart (dashed
white line).

are too large to fit onto one field of view and will require
a cranial and caudal view. In such cases, it is also useful
to obtain a view centered at the heart, especially when
cardiac disease is a concern.

Exposure and timing
Thoracic views should be exposed on peak i­ nspiration in
order to maximize inherent contrast. Because of patient
respiration, there is a risk of motion unsharpness when
obtaining a thoracic radiograph. Because of this, a technique using low mA or short exposure time and a high

23/04/16 1:27 pm

158

Diseases of specific organ systems

6.2

a

d

c

b

Figures 6.2a–d Positioning (a–c) to obtain a ventrodorsal view (d). The thoracic inlet and the proximal aspect of the caudal ribs
should be included to ensure all lungs are in the field of view. The view should be centered at the caudal angle of the scapula,
a palpable landmark for the heart when the forelimbs are extended. To avoid obliquity, a trough may be used (b). Sandbags
can be used to avoid personnel exposure. On the ventrodorsal radiograph (d), the caudal margins of the scapulae (arrows) are
superimposed near the plane of the center of the heart when the view is appropriately collimated and centered (dotted white line).

kV is most suitable for thoracic imaging. Motion can
also be limited by use of sedation. If full anesthesia is
required, the patient must be intubated and the views
obtained under positive pressure in order to avoid confounding results created by atelectasis, which can occur
within 5 ­minutes when 100% inspired oxygen is used.

READING THORACIC RADIOGRAPHS
Systematic approach
Indications for thoracic radiography are listed in
Table 6.1. A systematic approach increases the comfort level for interpretation of radiographic studies and

Table 6.1 Indications for thoracic radiography.

Indication

Associated clinical signs
or history

Some common differential diagnoses

Thoracic barrier
abnormality

Palpable or visible
defect; thoracic wall pain;
known trauma

Rib or soft tissue thoracic wall mass: neoplasia (lipoma, sarcoma); abscess/
cellulitis (trauma, migrating foreign body)
Trauma: rib fracture, hematoma
Congenital malformation

Respiratory disease

Cough; dyspnea/tachypnea; cyanosis; exercise
intolerance; syncope;
altered respiratory
sounds

Tracheobronchitis: inflammatory/allergic; infectious (viral, bacterial,
parasitic)
Tracheomalacia/bronchomalacia
Bronchopneumonia/aspiration
Bronchiectasis
Tracheal hypoplasia
Cardiogenic edema
Noncardiogenic edema: near drowning; strangulation; electrocution;
toxicity/drug reaction; neurogenic; barotrauma; acute lung injury or acute
respiratory distress syndrome; re-expansion pulmonary edema; aspiration of
irritant; overhydration; vasculitis; uremic pneumonitis
(Continued)

K22463_C006.indd 158

23/04/16 1:27 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

Indication

Associated clinical signs
or history

159

Some common differential diagnoses
Upper airway obstruction: tracheal/bronchial foreign body; mural abnormality; extramural compression by mass or cardiac enlargement
Interstitial infiltration: pneumonitis (inflammatory/allergic, infectious);
neoplasia (e.g. lymphoma)
Pulmonary mass(es): neoplasia; abscess; granuloma; cyst; hematoma
Pulmonary fibrosis
Hemorrhage
Lung lobe torsion
Anomaly: Kartagener’s syndrome or ciliary dyskinesia; surfactant deficiency

Cardiovascular
disease

Audible murmur; dyspnea/tachypnea; exercise
intolerance; syncope;
cough; altered respiratory sounds; cyanosis;
arrhythmia

Acquired cardiac diseases: endocardiosis; cardiomyopathy; heartworm
infection
Congenital cardiac diseases: intra- and extracardiac shunts (L → R or R → L);
valvular malformations
Pericardial disease/effusion
Cor pulmonale

Pleural disease

Dyspnea/tachypnea;
exercise intolerance;
altered respiratory
sounds (decreased);
decreased audibility of
heart

Pleural effusion: transudates; exudates; hemorrhage; chyle
Pneumothorax
Diaphragmatic rupture
Pleural mass

Mediastinal disease
(noncardiac)

Regurgitation/dysphagia; dyspnea/tachypnea;
exercise intolerance;
altered respiratory
sounds

Megaesophagus (generalized): metabolic; congenital; esophagitis
Focal esophageal dilation (esophageal obstruction): luminal foreign body;
mural lesion; extraluminal compression; vascular ring anomaly; hiatal
herniations
Mediastinal mass: lymph node (lymphoma); thymus
Tracheal compression/obstruction
Pneumomediastinum
Mediastinitis

Trauma

Dyspnea/tachypnea;
altered respiratory
sounds; thoracic wall
pain; palpable or visible
thoracic wall defect

Pulmonary contusions
Rib fractures
Pneumomediastinum
Pneumothorax and/or pleural hemorrhage
Shock
Diaphragmatic rupture

Systemic disease

Fever; lethargy; weight
loss; neoplasia

Numerous potential causes

Screening test

Geriatric patient;
preanesthetic

Maybe none

Monitor response to
treatment

Improved or worsened
clinical signs

prevents lesions being missed. To be systematic, the
interpreter should have a standardized protocol of thoracic views. The influence of recumbency on the appearance of thoracic structures is detailed in Table 6.2. Also,

K22463_C006.indd 159

each view should be oriented and reviewed the same way
each time. All radiographic studies must be approached
in the same way, analogous to completing a checklist of
anatomic structures (Box 6.1).

23/04/16 1:27 pm

160

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 6.2 Influence of recumbency on the appearance of thoracic structures.
Lateral views
Right

Left

Heart more elongated (apex contacts sternum, white arrow)
Diaphragmatic crura parallel (dotted line)
Right crus more cranial
Gas located in gastric fundus (black arrow)
Esophagus often not visible
Assess left-sided lungs

Heart more rounded (apex can appear elevated, white arrow)
Diaphragmatic crura diverge (dotted line)
Left crus more cranial
Gas located in pylorus (black arrow)
Esophagus more readily seen (dotted arrows)
Assess right-sided lungs

Ventrodorsal/dorsoventral views
Ventrodorsal

Dorsoventral

(Continued)

K22463_C006.indd 160

23/04/16 1:27 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

161

Diaphragmatic crura seen (white arrows) in addition to the
c­ entral cupola
Increased distance between cardiac apex and diaphragm
Heart elongated
Apex closer to midline (black double arrow)
Increased apparent divergence of principle bronchi (dotted line)
Accessory lung lobe better aerated and better assessed
Caudal vena cava better seen

Only the cupola of the diaphragm is seen creating a dome
shape (white arrows)
Contact between diaphragm and cardiac apex
Heart rounded
Apex positioned further to left (black double arrow)
Position of principle bronchi less divergent (dotted line)
Caudal lung lobes better aerated and better assessed
Caudal lobar vessels better seen

Box 6.1 Systematic evaluation of the thorax.

INTERPRETATION OF THORACIC
ABNORMALITIES

•• Extrathoracic structures:
○○ Superficial soft tissues (skin, fat, muscle)
○○ Skeleton (spine, sternum, ribs, visible forelimbs)
○○ Diaphragm
○○ Visible abdomen
•• Pleural space
•• Noncardiac mediastinum:
○○ Mediastinal reflections
○○ Trachea
○○ Esophagus*
○○ Vascular structures (e.g. aorta, caudal vena cava,
azygos*)
○○ Thymus**
○○ Sternal, cranial mediastinal, and tracheobronchial
lymph nodes*
○○ Lymphatics*
•• Heart, great vessels, and pericardium
•• Lungs:
○○ Airway (bronchi, bronchioles*, and alveoli*)
○○ Pulmonary arteries and veins
○○ Interstitium (elastic fibers, collagen, fibroblasts,
smooth muscle, mast cells, mononuclear cells)
*Structures not radiographically visible in a normal animal.
**Structure not normally visible in a mature animal.

Description
When an abnormality is detected during systematic
evaluation, it must be described. The classic approach to
radiographic description uses a list of signs: size, shape,
location, number, margination, and opacity. These can
be used to prompt the interpreter of characteristics to
consider when describing apparent lesions. Evaluating
a lesion with respect to these descriptors ensures that
the interpreter processes the abnormality thoroughly
and has a starting point for researching causes of any
lesions. These morphologic descriptions are essential
for recognizing abnormalities and differentiating their
causes.

K22463_C006.indd 161

Extrathoracic structures
Extrathoracic structures should be evaluated early
during interpretation, as findings within the thorax
often distract from extrathoracic lesions. The presence or lack of symmetry of the thoracic wall should
be noted on the ventrodorsal/dorsoventral view. Often,
enough of the abdomen is included to determine the
presence of cranial organomegaly or loss of detail.
Regardless of whether lesions located in extrathoracic
structures are related to clinical signs, they can influence the appearance of structures within the thorax
and should be noted prior to determination of intrathoracic abnormalities.

Superficial soft tissues and skeleton
Thoracic boundaries include the intercostal and paraspinal muscles, ribs, spine, diaphragm, and thoracic inlet.
Opacities comprising the thoracic wall include soft tissue,
fat, and mineral and the appearance can vary based on
conformation and body condition score. Lesions within
the thoracic wall can be categorized as congenital or
acquired. Additionally, acquired abnormalities can be
further categorized as traumatic or nontraumatic and as
originating from the skeleton versus soft tissue.
Congenital thoracic wall abnormalities include vertebral body malformations, transitional vertebrae, and
sternal anomalies such as pectus excavatum or carinatum. Most of these abnormalities do not create clinical
signs requiring correction.
Differential diagnoses for thoracic wall mass are typical
of a mass at any location and include neoplasia (skeletal
or soft tissue), abscess/cellulitis, hematoma, granuloma,
and cyst. Ranking of these differential diagnoses is based
on a full description of the abnormality along with the
clinical history. Neoplasia, cellulitis/abscess, and hemorrhage/hematoma formation are the three most likely
causes of a thoracic wall mass.

23/04/16 1:27 pm

162

Diseases of specific organ systems

Lipomas are the most common thoracic wall neoplasms. Most often, these are benign, slow-growing,
well-demarcated nodules or masses located in the subcutaneous soft tissues and recognized by their fat opacity rather than soft tissue opacity. Nonlipomatous, focal,
acquired nodules or masses associated with the thoracic
wall may be soft tissue or mineral opaque. They may be
broad based (sessile) or have a stalk-like attachment to
the thoracic wall (pedunculated). Malignant thoracic wall
lesions are most often sarcomas originating from ribs,
with primary osteosarcoma and chondrosarcoma being
the most common. Radiographically visible rib lysis or
periosteal proliferation is seen as evidence of aggression
(Figures 6.3a–c). Care must be taken to correctly categorize a lesion as originating within the thoracic wall rather
than within lung, as differential diagnoses appropriate to
the organ of origin must be assigned. Lesions extending
into the thorax may be mistaken as having a pulmonary

organ of origin. Lysis or periosteal proliferation of the
skeleton of the thoracic wall is evidence of a thoracic wall
lesion. Also, the presence of an extrapleural sign can differentiate mass lesions as being associated with thoracic
wall rather than being pulmonary. An extrapleural sign
occurs when the margin of a thoracic wall lesion has a
broad-based contact with the wall and an obtuse angle
is formed between the lesion and the normal pleural
surface. This localizes a lesion to the extrapleural space,
which includes any structure superficial to the parietal
pleura. A lung lesion would be expected to have a more
narrow point of contact, creating an acute angle between
the mass and the thoracic wall. Care must be taken to
view the location of the mass relative to the profile at
its junction with the thoracic wall, as an extrapleural
mass not located on a tangent with the wall will create
an acute angle, falsely appearing pulmonary rather than
extrapleural in origin (Figure 6.3c).

6.3

a

b

c

K22463_C006.indd 162

Figures 6.3a–c Extrapleural sign in a dog with
chondrosarcoma of the left 3rd rib. A focal region of expansile
rib lysis and surrounding mass is present within the left cranial
thoracic wall (a, b, white arrows). On the lateral and humanoid
ventrodorsal projections (a, b), the mass appears to have a
narrow-based point of contact creating an acute angle with
the thoracic wall. On an oblique image obtained to view the
lesion at its junction with the thoracic wall (c), the soft tissue
component of the mass is clearly broad based, creating an
obtuse angle between it and the thoracic wall (black arrows).
The broad-based point of contact combined with the visible rib
lysis confirms an extrapleural origin for the mass.

23/04/16 1:27 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

Most thoracic wall masses associated with neoplasia or
infection are palpable on physical examination. The benefit of radiographic examination is to determine opacity
and, therefore, potential tissue type of the mass, involvement of bone, or presence of intrathoracic extension.
In cases of trauma, hematoma formation may result
in a soft tissue mass of the thoracic wall. The presence of
concurrent rib fractures overwhelms the effect of hematoma formation in deforming the thoracic wall. Serial
and segmental rib fractures are most likely to create an
alteration in thoracic shape on physical examination and
radiographically, and may result in paradoxical chest
wall movement indicative of flail chest.

Pleural space

Diaphragm and cranial abdomen

Soft tissue opacity in the pleural space
Pleural effusion

The diaphragm defines the caudal thoracic boundary.
On a normal thoracic study, the diaphragm should be
positioned near the 11th or 12th thoracic vertebra on
full inspiration. A position cranial to this may ­indicate
a technical failure to expose the view on inspiration and
should be corrected. If not due to technical factors, a
cranially positioned diaphragm may be categorized as a
­primary disturbance of the diaphragm itself or secondary to abdominal or thoracic abnormalities. Primary
diaphragmatic pathology is rare and includes unilateral
or bilateral paralysis and malformation of the muscle
(diaphragmatic eventration). Secondary causes may be
related to increased abdominal mass or abnormalities
within the lungs or pleural space. A caudally positioned
diaphragm is typically not associated with any technical
error, although extreme inspiration can result in a diaphragm that is positioned at T13 or caudally. Additional
causes of a caudally positioned diaphragm are listed in
Table 6.3. Keep in mind that diaphragmatic malpositioning may be unilateral or bilateral.
Loss of distinction of diaphragmatic margins is most
often due to border effacement associated with pleural or
pulmonary disease. If the diaphragm is effaced, its integrity cannot be confirmed.

163

The thoracic boundaries (thoracic wall and diaphragm)
are lined by parietal pleura. The parietal pleura reflects
onto itself dorsally to surround the right and left lungs,
forming a continuation called the visceral pleura that
is tightly adhered to the lung surface. The two layers of
pleura surrounding the right and left lungs form the
pleural sacs. The pleural sacs each create boundaries of
the mediastinum, which lies primarily on midline. The
visceral pleura surrounds each lung lobe and extends
between each lobe as the lungs exit the hilus. This creates fissures between each of the lung lobes, which can be
radiographically evident in cases of pleural disease.

Pleural effusion is the accumulation of fluid within the
pleural space. As the fluid volume exceeds 100 ml, it
will become radiographically evident in most dogs and
cats. Several radiographic signs indicate the presence
of pleural effusion (Box 6.2 and Figures 6.4a, b). Often,
several of these signs are present on each thoracic view,
increasing the support for a diagnosis of pleural effusion.
The visibility of each radiographic sign is more pronounced with increasing fluid volumes.
Box 6.2 Radiographic signs indicating pleural effusion.
•• Separation of lungs from the thoracic wall by fluid opacity:
○○ Secondary decreased lung volume creating interstitial
or alveolar pulmonary patterns
•• Presence of pleural fissure lines that widen at the
periphery seen on lateral and ventrodorsal views
•• Blunting of the right and left costophrenic angles seen
on the ventrodorsal view
•• Scalloping of ventral lung margins on the lateral view(s)
•• Border effacement of the mediastinum, heart, thoracic
wall, and diaphragm
•• Increased thoracic diameter with severe fluid
accumulations

Table 6.3 Pathologic causes of unilateral or bilateral abnormal diaphragmatic positioning.
Cranially positioned diaphragm

Caudally positioned diaphragm

Study exposed on expiration
Obese patient
Abdominal mass effect
Pulmonary atelectasis
Upper airway obstruction
Pain with inspiration
Diaphragmatic paralysis (rare)
Diaphragmatic eventration (rare)

Exaggerated inspiration
Air trapping (lower airway obstruction)
Pulmonary emphysema
Increased intrapleural/intrathoracic volume
Pneumothorax
Pleural effusion
Thoracic mass(es)

K22463_C006.indd 163

23/04/16 1:27 pm

164

Diseases of specific organ systems

6.4

a

The position of the animal influences the visibility of
each of the radiographic signs presented in Box 6.2. First,
pleural fissure lines are less prominently seen on the dorsoventral view than on the ventrodorsal view. Also, the
visibility of the cardiac silhouette varies with sternal or
dorsal recumbency (Figures 6.5a, b). The heart is a soft tissue opaque, ventrally located structure. When an ­animal
is positioned in sternal recumbency, gravity-dependent
fluid accumulates ventrally and surrounds the ventrally
located heart. Because the heart and fluid are of identical
opacity and are in direct contact with each other, margins
become effaced. When an animal is positioned in dorsal
recumbency, the fluid accumulates dorsally. Lungs rise
to the nongravity dependent part of the thorax, which
is ventral, and surround the heart, making its margins
evident.

Causes of pleural effusion
Pleural effusion is most often secondary to another disease process. Pleural fluid should be considered based on
the underlying cause of each of the potential fluid types:
transudates including modified transudates, exudates,
hemorrhage, and chyle. Causes for each of these fluid
types are listed in Table 6.4. The most common causes
of pleural effusion in both dogs and cats are pyothorax,
neoplasia, and cardiac failure. In many cases, determination of the underlying cause of pleural effusion requires
fluid analysis, systematic clinical work up, and advanced
imaging such as thoracic ultrasound or CT.

Keys to interpreting cases with pleural effusion
Interpretation of thoracic studies showing pleural effusion can be a challenge. Especially with moderate to
severe fluid volumes, the visualization of soft tissue
thoracic structures such as the heart, mediastinum, and
6.5

b
Figures 6.4a, b Right lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b)
radiographs of a dog with moderate pleural effusion. There is
separation of the lungs from the thoracic wall by fluid opacity
(black arrows). Pleural fissure lines are present that widen at
the peripheral aspect of the thorax, further from the hilus
(white arrows). The right and left costophrenic angles are
blunted (dotted white arrows). Additionally, there is border
effacement of the cardiac apex and ventral diaphragm on the
lateral view (a). The presence of each of these findings will be
more pronounced with increased fluid volumes.

K22463_C006.indd 164

a

b

Figures 6.5a, b Mobility of fluid in the pleural space in sternal
(a) and dorsal (b) recumbency.

23/04/16 1:27 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

Table 6.4 Causes of pleural effusion.
Fluid type

Underlying causes

Transudates and
modified transudates

Congestive heart failure or
­systemic venous obstruction
Hypoproteinemia
Diaphragmatic translocation of
peritoneal effusion
Diaphragmatic rupture
Neoplasia
Vasculitis
Lung lobe torsion
Pleuritis, mediastinitis

Exudates (septic/­
pyothorax
or ­nonseptic
inflammatory)

Primary lung disease (pulmonary
abscess or pneumonia)
Pleuritis, mediastinitis
Foreign body migration (grass
awn)

Hemorrhage
(hemothorax)

Coagulation deficit
Trauma
Neoplasia

Chyle (chylothorax)

Obstruction of lymphatic
return (congestive heart failure,
neoplasia)
Ruptured lymphatics (trauma,
neoplasia)

pleural margins can be impossible. In such cases, the
interpreter should make the best of what clues are visible in order to diagnose, or at least rule out, sources of
pleural effusion, keeping in mind that pleural effusion is
typically a secondary process and nonpleural disease is
often the cause of the pleural effusion. Some steps that
can be used to investigate the causes of pleural effusion
are listed in Box 6.3.
Mediastinal masses often result in pleural effusion
and can sometimes be evident owing to an alteration in
tracheal positioning, which remains air filled and readily distinct. Marked deviations or compressions of the
trachea should be noted as potential signs of underlying mediastinal disease resulting in pleural effusion
(Figures 6.6a, b). In cases of pleural effusion, the trachea
will elevate to some degree, but its path should remain
straight with no focal changes in direction. Also, the tracheal hilus should be located at the 5th or 6th intercostal
space in a normal animal or an animal having only pleural effusion. If a mediastinal mass is large enough, caudal
displacement of the hilus may result. The cranial mediastinum is best assessed on the ventrodorsal view in cases
of pleural effusion, as most masses are ventrally located
and are effaced by any fluid located ventrally.

K22463_C006.indd 165

165

Box 6.3 Next steps in the analysis of cases with pleural
effusion.
•• Obtain all four radiographic projections so that all lung
fields, the mediastinum, and the cardiac silhouette can
be best assessed:
○○ Ensure that the entire thoracic wall, including all the
ribs, is visible in the study
•• When evaluating the radiographic study, pay close
attention to the following:
○○ Cardiac size and shape (need ventrodorsal view)
○○ Tracheal positioning for evidence of a cranial
mediastinal mass
○○ Ribs, sternum, and spine for evidence of an
extrapleural lesion
○○ Lungs for evidence of masses or nodules (all four
views may be needed)
○○ Bronchi for alterations in position or blunting,
possibly indicating lung lobe torsion
○○ Presence of a mediastinal shift in the face of bilateral
pleural effusion indicating a thoracic mass or
diaphragmatic rupture
○○ Presence of abdominal disease at the edge of the
study
○○ Lung margination as being sharp or rounded
•• Tap the fluid and repeat radiographic views
•• Perform analysis of tapped fluid
•• Perform thoracic ultrasonography or CT

Primary or metastatic neoplasms resulting in pulmonary masses or nodules can be obscured by pleural effusion. In cases of moderate to severe pleural effusion, the
lung volume will be decreased. This results in a secondary
atelectasis and an increase in pulmonary opacity that is
typically most severe in the cranial or right middle lung
lobes. When atelectasis is severe, interpretation of lungs
as normal or abnormal is impossible and it can preclude
visibility of masses and nodules. Additionally, border
effacement of the heart, mediastinum, and thoracic wall
by fluid can prevent interpretation of these structures.
Removal of fluid and repeat radiographic examination
can increase the visibility of mass(es) within the thorax
(Figures 6.7a, b). As with removal of any tissue, unless a
diagnosis is known, the fluid sample should be analyzed
for evidence of its underlying cause.

Diaphragmatic rupture
Separation of the lungs from the thoracic wall by
soft ­
tissue opacity and border effacement of the diaphragm are most often caused by pleural fluid; however,
these signs may be due to soft tissue rather than fluid.
Diaphragmatic rupture must always be considered in
thoracic studies where pleural soft tissue opacity is

23/04/16 1:27 pm

166

Diseases of specific organ systems

6.6

a

b

Figures 6.6a, b Lateral thoracic radiographs of a cat having only pleural effusion (a) and a cat having a mediastinal mass with
concurrent pleural effusion (b). In the cat with pleural effusion, the trachea is mildly uniformly elevated (a, black arrows) due to
the pleural fluid and the influence it has on lung and, subsequently, tracheal positioning. The tracheal hilus is in a normal position
located at the junction between the 5th and 6th intercostal spaces (a, white arrow). Additionally, the tracheal lumen remains similar
in diameter throughout its length (a, double-headed arrows). In the cat having concurrent pleural effusion and a cranial mediastinal
mass, the trachea is markedly elevated and focally deviated in the region of the cranial mediastinum (b, black arrows). The trachea is
compressed, as seen by a decrease in diameter at the level of the tracheal deviation (b, double-headed arrows). The tracheal hilus is
also caudally displaced and is located at the center of the 7th intercostal space (b, white arrow).

6.7

a

b

Figures 6.7a, b Right lateral radiographs of the same dog before (a) and after (b) tapping pleural effusion that was secondary to
a primary pulmonary carcinoma of the right caudal lung lobe. Prior to tapping a pulmonary mass is not visible due to the presence
of marked pleural effusion. A general increase in pulmonary opacity is present, which is most severe near the tracheal hilus, where
an alveolar pulmonary pattern is seen (a, black arrows). This is typical of the location for atelectasis when complete lung expansion
is prevented by pleural fluid. After tapping the fluid, a well-defined, round mass within the caudal lung is clearly evident (b, white
arrows). Fluid analysis was consistent with carcinoma. The region of atelectasis, although not completely resolved, is diminished
(b, black arrows).

K22463_C006.indd 166

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

present and the diaphragmatic margins are effaced such
that its integrity cannot be confirmed. In many cases of
diaphragmatic rupture, concurrent pleural effusion is
present along with herniated abdominal organs, complicating radiographic confirmation of herniation. Several
radiographic signs (Box 6.4 and Figures 6.8a, b) raise
suspicion of diaphragmatic rupture above that of pleural
fluid occurring alone.

Pleural masses
In addition to herniated abdominal organs, neoplasia
or severe pleuritis can be responsible for pleural mass
lesions. Often, concurrent, mobile pleural fluid is also
present in these cases, resulting in border effacement of
the pleural mass and making it radiographically invisible. Similar to diaphragmatic rupture with abdominal
organ herniation, pleural masses due to neoplasia or
­pyogranulomatous pleuritis can be large enough to create a thoracic mass effect recognized as a deviation of the
heart, trachea, or lungs away from the lesion (contralateral

167

mediastinal shift). Again, the mediastinal shift may be the
only i­ndication of a pleural mass versus mobile p
­ leural
effusion.

Box 6.4 Radiographic signs indicating diaphragmatic
rupture.
•• Partial border effacement of the diaphragm that is more
prominent on one side versus the other
•• Separation of lungs from the thoracic wall by soft
tissue/fluid opacity that is more prominent in one hemithorax versus the other
•• Contained tubular or round gas opacities within the
thorax or crossing the diaphragm
•• Decreased abdominal contents within peritoneal space:
○○ Absence of visible organs
○○ Wasp-waist appearance to abdominal wall
•• Cranially displaced gastric axis
•• Evidence of pleural mass effect:
○○ Contralateral mediastinal shift with displaced heart
and trachea away from the hemithorax having the
most pleural opacity

6.8

a

b

Figures 6.8a, b Lateral (a) and dorsoventral (b) radiographs of a dog presented for increased respiratory effort after vehicular
trauma. A marked increase in soft tissue opacity is present within the caudal ventral thorax, which is notably located on the left
side. There is border effacement of most of the cardiac silhouette and the diaphragm. The left diaphragmatic margin is effaced on
the dorsoventral view. The tracheal hilus is deviated to the right hemithorax (b, dotted black arrows) consistent with a mediastinal
shift away from the hemithorax containing most of the increased soft tissue opacity. The normal caudoventral liver margin is not
identified and the tail of the spleen (a, white arrows) is cranially displaced. These findings support the diagnosis of diaphragmatic
rupture with herniated abdominal organs. Finally, a gas-filled structure with visible rugal folds consistent with the stomach is seen
crossing from the abdomen to the thorax (black arrows), confirming diagnosis of herniation.

K22463_C006.indd 167

23/04/16 1:28 pm

168

Diseases of specific organ systems

Gas opacity in the pleural space (pneumothorax)
Pneumothorax is accumulated gas within the ­
pleural
space, between the parietal and visceral pleura. It has multiple potential causes that are categorized as traumatic,
spontaneous, or iatrogenic (Table 6.5). Pneumothorax
may also be considered open or closed. An open pneumothorax implies a penetrating or perforating trauma with
extension of air from the environment into the pleural
space. Closed pneumothorax occurs when the respiratory system is the source of gas within the pleural space.
Trauma is the most common underlying cause of pneumothorax and is the only category that can result both
closed and/or open configurations.
Spontaneous pneumothorax is always closed and
results from some extension of air from the respiratory
system. It can be primary or secondary. Primary spontaneous pneumothorax occurs when there is no evidence of
underlying pulmonary disease. In reality, most cases are
assumed to be the result of a ruptured pulmonary bulla
or bleb, which, of course, implies underlying pulmonary
pathology. Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax is
associated with known underlying lung disease (except
pulmonary bullae or blebs). Dogs most commonly have
primary spontaneous pneumothorax; cats have secondary spontaneous pneumothorax.
The radiographic signs of pneumothorax are summarized in Box 6.5. The right lateral view is the most

Table 6.5 Categories and causes of pneumothorax.
Category

Underlying cause(s)

Traumatic

Open: penetrating or perforating wound
Closed: blunt force trauma

Spontaneous

Primary:
•• Idiopathic
•• Presumed rupture of bulla or bleb
Secondary:
•• Rupture of necrotic or cavitary lung
lesions (not bullae or blebs):
○○ Pneumonia
○○ Parasitic infection
○○ Pulmonary abscess
○○ Cavitary neoplasm
○○ Congenital lobar emphysema
○○ Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
○○ Grass awn migration
○○ Interstitial pneumonitis or fibrosis
○○ Pulmonary thromboembolism

Iatrogenic

Extreme positive pressure ventilation
Thoracocentesis

K22463_C006.indd 168

Box 6.5 Radiographic signs indicating pneumothorax.
•• Separation of the heart from the sternum (earliest
­visible sign seen on lateral view):
○○ Absence of pulmonary vascular markings at the
region of separation
•• Retraction of lungs from the thoracic wall by gas
opacity:
○○ Absence of pulmonary vascular markings at the
region of retraction
•• General increased lung opacity:
○○ More evident with increasing pleural volume of gas
•• Evidence of tension (only with severe gas
accumulations):
○○ Flattened or tented diaphragm
○○ Mediastinal shift away from pleural space containing
most gas
○○ Barrel-shaped chest

sensitive view for detection of pneumothorax, where separation of the heart from the sternum is often the first
sign seen (Figures 6.9a–d). Some thin animals lack thoracic fat along the sternum thus giving a false impression
of cardiac elevation. Additionally, separation of the lungs
from the thoracic wall with gas opacity indicates pleural
gas. The key to diagnosing pleural gas is recognizing the
absence of pulmonary vascular markings in the region
suspected of absent lungs. In cases of spontaneous pneumothorax, the underlying pulmonary bulla or bleb is
often not evident radiographically. Compared with radiography, CT is able to detect the underlying bullae with
much greater sensitivity.

Noncardiac mediastinum
As an entry point into the central thorax and evaluation
of the mediastinum, the extrathoracic trachea should be
followed, evaluating its margins until the bifurcation is
reached. From this point, the mediastinum can be evaluated. Abnormalities include alterations in margination
(decreased visibility due to borer effacement), position,
size, or opacity of the mediastinum. The mediastinum
spans from the thoracic inlet to the diaphragm and the
entire dorsal to ventral dimension of the thorax. The
mediastinal compartment communicates with fascial
planes of the neck cranially and with the retroperitoneal
space caudally (through the aortic hiatus). This communication is important when determining the underlying cause of pneumomediastinum, as discussed later.
The mediastinum includes many structures that are not
normally visible on thoracic radiographs due to border
effacement, including sternal, cranial mediastinal, and

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

169

6.9

a

c

b

d

Figures 6.9a–d Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of a dog with moderate pneumothorax, with accompanying magnified
views of the indicated regions (c, d). Moderate separation of the heart from the sternum with interposed gas opacity is seen on the
lateral view (a, white double arrow). Additionally, separation of the lungs from the thoracic wall is visible on both views (c, d, black
arrows). The lungs are mildly, diffusely increased in opacity, consistent with atelectasis due to increased pleural volume.

tracheobronchial lymph nodes, thymus, esophagus, vessels
(e.g. brachiocephalic trunk, left subclavian, ­azygos vein),
nerves, and lymphatics. In the diseased state, these structures may become visible due to altered size or opacity.

K22463_C006.indd 169

The main visible mediastinal structures are the trachea,
heart, and great vessels. Cardiovascular mediastinal
structures will be discussed in more detail in the next section. The thymus is visible only in young animals.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

170

Diseases of specific organ systems

Mediastinal gas (pneumomediastinum)
Mediastinal gas, or pneumomediastinum, can be seen
independently or concurrent with pneumothorax.
Radiographically, mediastinal gas is readily distinguished from pleural gas because it acts as a contrast,
increasing visibility of opaque soft tissue from margins
within the cranial mediastinum that are not normally
seen (Figure 6.10). The most commonly seen radiographic
sign is increased delineation of the outer tracheal wall
as it is highlighted by gas. The lateral view is typically
the only view that is diagnostic for pneumomediastinum, as superimposition precludes visibility of mediastinal gas on the orthogonal view. Pneumomediastinum
has several potential causes (Box 6.6). In many cases,
the clinical history provides a clue as to the underlying
cause. Trauma is the most commonly reported cause of
pneumomediastinum.
Given the potential causes of pneumomediastinum,
it is recommended that radiographs be obtained of the
entire neck in order to assess the larynx, trachea, and
other cervical structures, which may be the cause of mediastinal gas. In many cases of tracheal rupture, a lesion is
not identified on radiographs and endoscopic e­ xamination
may be needed to assess the integrity of the trachea
and esophagus. Typically, when esophageal rupture

6.10

causes pneumomediastinum, concurrent m
­ ediastinal and,
­therefore, pleural effusion is seen.
Regardless of the cause of pneumomediastinum, gas
within the mediastinal space can leak into the pleural
space due to fenestrations. However, gas within the pleural
space will never leak into the mediastinum, as excess pleural pressure due to the pneumothorax would be expected to
collapse the mediastinum and would, in fact, be protective
against gas entering the mediastinum. Also, as previously
mentioned, the mediastinum communicates with the
cervical fascial planes cranially and the retroperitoneal
space caudally. Therefore, gas within the mediastinum
can extend to these spaces and gas within these spaces can
extend to the mediastinum. Pneumomediastinum that is
of such severity as to cause subcutaneous emphysema
after tracking through the cervical soft tissues should be
assumed to occur from tracheal rupture.

Mediastinal shift
Mediastinal structures such as the trachea and heart can
be displaced from their midline locations due to disease
in the pleural or pulmonary space. Mediastinal shifts can
be categorized as contralateral or ipsilateral. A contralateral mediastinal shift follows disease present in the right
or left hemithorax that causes a push of the mediastinum
away from the diseased side. An ipsilateral mediastinal
shift occurs when disease within the thorax causes a pull
of the mediastinum towards the diseased side, which has
a decrease in volume or a physical tethering of the mediastinum towards the lesion. Some diseases that may cause
a mediastinal shift have been mentioned previously in
the discussion on pleural diseases. Additional causes are
shown in Table 6.6. Recognition of a mediastinal shift
can be key to differentiating the causes of pulmonary or
pleural lesions seen, but it is almost never associated with
mediastinal lesions alone, therefore its presence typically
indicates disease outside the mediastinum.
Box 6.6 Causes of pneumomediastinum.

Figure 6.10 Pneumomediastinum in a dog that had received
multiple bite wounds. Subcutaneous emphysema is present
superimposed over the thorax and located ventrally (white
arrowheads). The outer margin of the trachea is visible (black
arrows) because it is surrounded by gas. The margins of the
brachiocephalic trunk (dotted white arrows) and left subclavian
(white arrows) are no longer effaced by surrounding soft tissue
structures due to interposed gas highlighting their margins. The
cranial abdominal aorta is visible (dotted black arrows) because
it is surrounded by gas extending into the retroperitoneal space
through the aortic hiatus.

K22463_C006.indd 170

•• Cervical trauma:
○○ Penetrating wounds (e.g. bites) introducing gas into
deep cervical soft tissues
•• Tracheal or laryngeal rupture
•• Alveolar rupture causing tracking of gas through
interstitium:
○○ Blunt force thoracic trauma
○○ Iatrogenic pulmonary hyperinflation
•• Esophageal rupture (concurrent effusion is expected)
•• Extension from the retroperitoneal space (uncommon)
•• Mediastinitis due to gas-producing bacteria (concurrent
effusion is expected)

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

Mediastinal masses
Recognition of the position of the trachea is key to differentiating the most likely organ or origin for many
mediastinal masses. As previously mentioned, many of
Table 6.6 Categorization and causes of a mediastinal shift.
Ipsilateral:
­ ediastinum is
m
pulled towards the
abnormality

Contralateral:
­mediastinum is
pushed away from
the abnormality

Pleural disease:
•• Adhesions between ­mediastinal
and thoracic wall pleura
(uncommon)
•• Atelectasis caused by fibrotic
pleura constricting lung(s)
(uncommon)
Pulmonary disease:
•• Remaining causes of atelectasis
(common):
○○ Positional/recumbency/­
anesthesia associated
○○ Bronchial obstruction
Pleural disease:
•• Unilateral pleural effusion or
pneumothorax (common)
•• Pleural mass (uncommon)
•• Diaphragmatic rupture with
herniated abdominal organs
(common)
Pulmonary disease:
•• Lung mass (common)

171

the structures within the mediastinum, especially within
the cranial mediastinum, are not visible in the normal
animal. However, when mediastinal structures become
enlarged, they create masses characteristic to their location within the mediastinum, which assists with identifying the organ of origin for the mass. The location of
mediastinal masses associated with specific organs is
shown in Table 6.7. The effect that these masses have on
the trachea is also shown.

Mediastinal structures
Trachea
In most small animals, the normal tracheal path diverges
from the thoracic spine, beginning at the thoracic inlet
and extending to the tracheal bifurcation. The normal
tracheal diameter should be consistent throughout and
should be slightly less than the diameter of the larynx.
Variations of tracheal diameter to thoracic inlet ratios
according to breed are listed in Table 6.8.
A decrease in tracheal luminal diameter may be diffuse throughout its length or segmental/focal. Also,
any tracheal narrowing can be caused by extraluminal,
luminal, or mural factors (Table 6.9). Diffuse narrowing
of the tracheal lumen is caused by mural abnormalities,
specifically tracheal hypoplasia, severe tracheal collapse
(Figure 6.11), or severe thickening of the tracheal mucosa
caused by tracheitis or hemorrhage. These causes may
be radiographically indistinguishable; however, tracheal

Table 6.7 Location of masses associated with mediastinal structures and their most common effect on tracheal positioning.
Organ of origin

Mediastinal location for mass

Direction of tracheal deviation

Esophagus:
•• Generalized enlargement
•• Focal enlargement

Dorsal:
•• Cranial, middle, and caudal
mediastinum
•• Craniodorsal or dorsal middle, most
typically

Ventral

Sternal lymph nodes

Cranioventral

Dorsal, if severe enlargement

Cranial mediastinal lymph nodes

Cranioventral

Dorsal

Thymus

Cranioventral

Dorsal +/- right

Ectopic thyroid

Cranioventral

Dorsal

Mediastinal (pharyngeal) cyst

Cranioventral

Dorsal

Heart base

Cranial or middle

Dorsal and right

Tracheobronchial lymph nodes

Middle

Ventral

Left atrium

Middle

Dorsal

Hiatal hernia

Caudodorsal

None

K22463_C006.indd 171

23/04/16 1:28 pm

172

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 6.8 Tracheal diameter to thoracic inlet ratios in
normal dogs.
Breed type

Ratio value

Nonbrachycephalic breeds

0.20 +/- 0.03

Nonbulldog brachycephalic
breeds

0.16 +/- 0.03

Bulldogs

0.13 +/- 0.04

6.11

Table 6.9 Causes of tracheal narrowing.
Length of
trachea
affected

Differential diagnoses

Diffuse

Mural abnormalities:
•• Tracheal hypoplasia
•• Tracheitis
•• Mucosal hemorrhage
•• Severe tracheal collapse

Focal or
segmental

Mural abnormalities:
•• Tracheal collapse
•• Tracheal stricture or cicatrix
•• Neoplasia:
○○ Osteochondroma, chondrosarcoma,
osteosarcoma, papilloma
•• Polyp
•• Granuloma:
○○ Parasitic (Filaroides osleri )
○○ Previous tracheal irritation or
trauma
Extramural abnormalities:
•• Mediastinal mass
•• Pulmonary mass (rarely)
Luminal abnormalities:
•• Foreign body

hypoplasia is congenital and a sudden decrease in tracheal luminal diameter in an animal with a previously
normal tracheal diameter would not be expected with
true hypoplasia, but may occur with acquired tracheitis
or hemorrhage. Tracheal hypoplasia is typically seen
in Bulldogs associated with other factors comprising
brachycephalic airway syndrome and is often, though not
always, diagnosed in younger animals. The radiographic
signs of upper airway obstruction are shown in Box 6.7.

Esophagus
Because of its dorsal position within the mediastinum,
esophageal dilation usually causes ventral displacement
of the trachea. A dilated esophagus may contain fluid,

K22463_C006.indd 172

Figure 6.11 Lateral thoracic radiograph of a dog with severe
tracheal collapse. The view was obtained under attempted
inspiration. The trachea at the thoracic inlet is collapsed and
not radiographically visible. The intrathoracic trachea is
visible, but narrow. The severity of this dog’s respiratory signs
precluded evaluation of tracheal collapse during cough using
fluoroscopy. The diaphragm is cranially positioned, overlapping
with the cardiac silhouette. Also, the caudal lungs are mildly
increased in opacity and reduced in size due to underaeration.
These findings indicate a secondary upper airway obstruction.

Box 6.7 Radiographic signs indicating upper airway
obstruction.
•• Tracheal narrowing at the obstruction
•• Increased tracheal diameter cranial to the obstruction
•• Decreased lung volume:
○○ Cranially positioned diaphragm
○○ Increased opacity of caudal lungs
•• Sternal elevation (most commonly seen in cats)
•• Inward deviation of intercostal muscles (most commonly
seen in cats)
•• Hiatal herniation due to decreased intrathoracic
pressure

gas, or both. On occasion, mineral material can be identified. The radiographic signs and differential diagnoses
for various esophageal diseases are listed in Table 6.10.
Radiographic signs indicating esophageal dilation are
listed in Box 6.8. Gas-filled esophageal dilation is sometimes more challenging to recognize because the gas
within the esophagus creates little contrast with the
lungs (Figures 6.12a, b). The tracheal stripe sign can be
seen when the ventral esophageal wall contacts the dorsal tracheal wall and creates a thick soft tissue opaque
line at the point of contact, which is surrounded by luminal tracheal and esophageal gas. Also, in a gas-dilated
esophagus, soft tissue opaque lines are seen within the

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

173

Table 6.10 Radiographic descriptors and some common differential diagnoses for esophageal disease.
Radiographic descriptor

Differential diagnoses

Altered esophageal opacity

Luminal material:
•• Mineral, metal, or soft tissue opaque foreign body or ingesta
•• Megaesophagus with excess luminal gas or fluid
Mural mass (concurrent with increased size):
•• Soft tissue mass (granuloma, abscess, or neoplasia)
•• Mineralized mass (e.g. malignant transformation of Spirocerca lupi granuloma)

Esophageal dilation

Generalized megaesophagus:
•• Idiopathic
•• Metabolic disease:
○○ Hypoadrenocorticism
○○ Hypothyroidism
•• Infection:
○○ Botulism
○○ Distemper
•• Toxicity:
○○ Lead
○○ Organophosphate
•• Anesthetic induced (transient)
•• Esophagitis
•• Paraneoplastic:
○○ Thymoma
•• Lower esophageal obstruction:
○○ Hiatal hernia
○○ Lower esophageal mass
•• Neuromuscular diseases:
○○ Dysautonomia
○○ Myasthenia gravis
○○ Storage diseases
Focal esophageal dilation:
•• Obstruction (luminal, extraluminal, or mural causes):
○○ Foreign body
○○ Vascular ring anomaly
○○ Stricture
○○ Esophageal mass
•• Esophageal diverticulum

Pneumomediastinum (+/- pneumothrorax)
and mediastinal/pleural effusion

•• Esophageal perforation

Box 6.8 Radiographic signs of esophageal dilation.
•• Visibility of the esophagus on plain radiographs:
○○ Soft tissue opaque tube located dorsally and on
midline (fluid or ingesta-filled esophagus)
○○ Converging soft tissue opaque lines within the caudal
mediastinum (gas-filled esophagus)
•• Ventral displacement of the trachea
•• Tracheal stripe sign (gas-filled esophagus)
•• Secondary abnormalities:
○○ Aspiration pneumonia
○○ Pneumomediastinum, pleural effusion,
pneumothorax, gas within cervical soft tissues
(esophageal perforation)

K22463_C006.indd 173

caudal mediastinum representing the walls of the esophagus as they converge at the esophageal hiatus. These
lines are visible in the expected location of the esophagus
(within the caudal mediastinum, between the aorta and
caudal vena cava on the lateral view and near the midline
on the orthogonal view). Megaesophagus is a risk factor
for aspiration pneumonia. When megaesophagus is positively identified, the lungs should be carefully evaluated.
Focal esophageal dilation may be caused by luminal,
extraluminal, or mural obstructions. Luminal causes
of obstruction occur with esophageal foreign bodies.
Esophageal foreign bodies are most commonly confined
between the heart base and diaphragm (Figures 6.13a, b).

23/04/16 1:28 pm

174

Diseases of specific organ systems

6.12

a

b

Figures 6.12a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of a dog with a gas-filled megaesophagus. The thoracic trachea is
ventrally displaced. A tracheal stripe sign is present (a, white arrows). Additionally, converging soft tissue opaque lines (a, b, black
arrows) are visible in the caudal mediastinum between the aorta and caudal vena cava on the lateral view and on the midline on the
ventrodorsal view consistent with margins of the esophageal wall, which are separated by excess luminal gas opacity. Increased leftsided pulmonary opacity consistent with alveolar disease is present due to aspiration secondary to megaesophagus.
6.13

a

b

Figures 6.13a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of a dog presented for retching and gagging. A poorly defined
soft tissue opaque mass is present within the dorsal thorax (a, white arrows). The mass is causing focal ventral deviation of
the trachea (a, black arrows) and it is located in the midline, causing widening of the mediastinum (b, white arrows). These
findings confirm that the mass is mediastinal in origin, most likely originating from the esophagus. A leather belt was removed
endoscopically.

Soft tissue opaque foreign bodies, such as rawhide treats,
can look similar to esophageal mural masses; however, foreign bodies are more common and present more acutely

K22463_C006.indd 174

than mural masses. Extraluminal causes of obstruction
resulting in focal esophageal dilation are infrequent.
Vascular ring anomalies are the most common cause

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

of extraluminal obstruction. Typically, a vascular ring
anomaly will cause the portion of the esophagus cranial
to the cardiac base to be dilated along with focal leftward
deviation of the esophagus and trachea. On some occasions, the entire esophagus may be dilated with a focal
narrowing near the heart base. Mural esophageal masses
caused by neoplasia, granuloma, or abscess are rare
causes of esophageal obstruction that can appear similar to each other. Hiatal diseases, including sliding hiatal and paraesophageal hernias, and gastroesophageal
intussusceptions also cause soft tissue opaque masses
associated with the caudal mediastinum. Sliding hiatal hernias are the most common of the hiatal diseases
and may be transient from one radiographic view to the
other. The similarity in survey radiographic findings of
the various causes of caudal esophageal masses is shown
in Figures 6.14a–c. The similarities often necessitate use
of positive contrast esophagography or endoscopy to differentiate among them.

175

6.14

a

b

Lymph nodes
Three main lymph node centers are present within the
mediastinum that can become radiographically visible when enlarged: sternal (Figures 6.15a, b), cranial
mediastinal (Figures 6.16a, b), and tracheobronchial
(Figures 6.17a, b). Both the sternal and cranial mediastinal lymph nodes are located in the cranial mediastinum
and the tracheobronchial lymph nodes are located in the
middle mediastinum. In the normal animal, these lymph
nodes are invisible. Most often, when lymph nodes become
radiographically visible, the underlying cause is neoplastic or granulomatous disease and may be secondary to disease in locations that drain along the lymphatic system.

Thymus
The thymus is located in the caudal part of the cranioventral mediastinum, within the cranioventral mediastinal
reflection. It is not radiographically visible in a normal
animal more than 1 year of age, due to involution. In a
young animal, the thymus may be visible, creating a
soft tissue opacity within the cranioventral mediastinal
reflection that is triangular in shape, appearing similar
to a sail on the ventrodorsal/dorsoventral view. Thymic
enlargement is more ventral in location than cranial
mediastinal lymph node enlargement and is more caudal than sternal lymph node enlargement. However,
when cranioventral mediastinal lesions approach massive sizes, their organ of origin is often impossible to
identify with certainty. Masses associated with the thymus are typically caused by thymoma (in dogs) or thymic lymphoma (in cats). Additional potential causes of

K22463_C006.indd 175

c
Figures 6.14a–c Lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs
of caudal mediastinal masses due to esophageal diseases
of different causes. In 6.14a, a mixed gas and soft tissue
opaque mass is seen in the caudal mediastinum (white
arrows). Endoscopy confirmed the presence of an esophageal
diverticulum. In 6.14b, a soft tissue opaque mass with a central
gas bubble is seen in the caudal mediastinum (white arrows).
A rawhide foreign body was diagnosed endoscopically. In 6.14c,
a soft tissue opacity is present in the caudal mediastinum
(white arrows), which has a focal gas bubble at its caudal
margin. A sliding hiatal hernia was confirmed and surgically
repaired. Oral administration of contrast could be performed
to further characterize the lesions; however, barium would
be contraindicated in 6.14b, as concurrent pleural effusion is
present, indicating potential for esophageal rupture, which was
found during endoscopy.

thymic enlargement include thymic cysts, hemorrhage,
and amyloidosis. Thymic masses, especially those caused
by thymomas, can be quite immense, causing dyspnea
due to tracheal compression and decreased lung volume
(Figures 6.18a, b).

23/04/16 1:28 pm

176

Diseases of specific organ systems

6.15

a

b

Figures 6.15a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of a dog with sternal lymphadenopathy due to lymphoma.
A broad-based soft tissue opacity is seen within the cranioventral thorax (a, white arrows) on the midline, creating a widened
cranial mediastinum on the ventrodorsal view (b, white arrows) and confirming a mediastinal location for the lesion. The cranial
mediastinum, in addition to being wide, is nonuniform in its width.

6.16

a

b

Figures 6.16a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of a dog with cranial mediastinal lymphadenopathy due to
lymphoma. A mass is located in the cranial and ventral aspect of the cranial mediastinum (white arrows), which is causing dorsal
deviation and compression of the cranial thoracic trachea (a, black arrow) and a widened cranial mediastinum (b, white arrows).
An interstitial pattern is also present, most evident in the caudal lungs, which is causing an increase in prominence of the bronchi
due to pulmonary lymphoma.

K22463_C006.indd 176

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

177

6.17

a

b

Figures 6.17a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of a dog with lymphoma and tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy.
The distal aspect of the trachea at the hilus and mainstem bronchi is focally ventrally deviated, giving the trachea a ‘J’
shape (a, black arrows). A moderately well-defined soft tissue opacity is present in the region of the hilus on the lateral view
(a, white arrows). This opacity is located between the mainstem bronchi on the ventrodorsal view and is causing widening of
the angle between the right and left bronchus (b, black arrows). These findings confirm a mediastinal location for a mass due to
tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy. Mild concurrent sternal lymphadenopathy is present that is only visible in the lateral view
(a, dotted white arrow).
6.18

a

b

Figures 6.18a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of a 2-year-old Labrador Retriever that presented for
tachypnea and dyspnea. A large cranial mediastinal mass is present, which is causing marked dorsal displacement of the trachea
(a, black arrows) and caudal displacement of the tracheal hilus to the level of the 7th intercostal space. A mild rightward
mediastinal shift is present, as shown by the position of the trachea on the ventrodorsal view (b, black arrows). The margins
of the heart are effaced and there is a marked decrease in lung volume due to the size of the mass. Thymoma was diagnosed
histopathologically.

K22463_C006.indd 177

23/04/16 1:28 pm

178

Diseases of specific organ systems

Heart, great vessels, and pericardium
Cardiac radiographic anatomy
Heart size can be subjectively determined based on the
apparent size of the heart relative to the thoracic cavity

Box 6.9 Indications for cardiac imaging.
•• Audible murmur
•• Exercise intolerance
•• Coughing
•• Dyspnea
•• Increased lung sounds
•• Cyanosis
•• Syncope
•• Abdominal distension/jugular pulses
•• Heartworm infection
•• Re-evaluation of previously diagnosed cardiac disease

Box 6.10 Cardiac size relative to thoracic cavity.
Canine
Lateral view:
•• Length of the heart is
less than two-thirds the
dorsoventral diameter of
the thorax
•• Width of the heart
is 2.5–3.5 intercostal
spaces (deep chested
breeds narrower than
barrel chested breeds)
•• Two-thirds of the width
of the heart is cranial to
the carina and one-third
is caudal
•• Trachea nearly parallel
to the sternum

Ventrodorsal view:
•• Left cardiac margin
flatter than the right
margin
•• Width of the cardiac
silhouette less than
two-thirds the width
of the thorax
•• Apex positioned
slightly left of midline

and the overall shape of the heart, created by individual
chambers. The indications for cardiac imaging are listed
in Box 6.9. Keeping in mind that breed variations exist,
the normal canine and feline cardiac silhouettes are
described in Box 6.10.
A scale can also be used to measure cardiac size. On
the lateral view, a line is drawn along the long axis of the
heart from the level of the cardiac base (at the level of the
tracheal hilus) to the cardiac apex. A second line is drawn
along the short axis of the heart from the level of the ventral caudal vena cava. This line extends to the cranial cardiac margin so that the second line is orthogonal to the
original line. Both of these lines are then transposed onto
the thoracic spine from the level of the cranial endplate
of T4 extending caudally (Figure 6.19). The number of
vertebrae encompassed within these lines constitutes the
vertebral heart scale (VHS). Most normal dogs (98%) have
a VHS less than 10.6, although some normal dogs will fall
above this value. To address this, breed-specific VHS values have been published for several barrel-chested small
breed dogs and Greyhounds. The reported upper limit
of the VHS in cats is 8.0. Regardless of the VHS obtained,
the cardiac silhouette must be examined for alterations
in shape and an increase in the VHS over time may indicate an abnormality, even if the measured VHS remains
within normal limits.
In order to arrive at an appropriate differential list,
specific chamber enlargement should be identified when
cardiomegaly is identified. Bulges seen within the cardiac

6.19

Feline
Lateral view:
•• Length of the heart is
less than two-thirds the
dorsoventral diameter of
the thorax
•• Width of the heart is 2–3
intercostal spaces
•• Trachea diverges from
spine and is nearly
­parallel to the sternum
•• Increased tracheal
divergence from spine
with age

K22463_C006.indd 178

Ventrodorsal view:
•• Left cardiac margin
flat
•• Width of the cardiac
silhouette less than
one-half the width of
the thorax
•• Apex positioned
­moderately left of
midline

Figure 6.19 Technique for measuring the vertebral heart scale
(VHS). (See text for details.)

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

silhouette must be anatomically differentiated within the
overall shape of the heart. This can be accomplished by
way of the clock-face analogy (Table 6.11). The chambers
of the heart are located within specific ‘times’ along the
clock. The clock-face analogy is similar in cats, except that
the left atrium is located more peripherally along the left
aspect of the cardiac silhouette rather than dorsally at
the caudal cardiac base.

Radiographic appearance of right-sided
cardiomegaly
Radiographically, right-sided cardiomegaly causes an
increase in width of the cardiac silhouette on the lateral
view and increased rounding of the right cardiac margin

179

on the ventrodorsal/dorsoventral views. Bulges in the
cardiac silhouette can be seen corresponding to the right
atrium, right ventricle, or both, according to the clockface analogy.
Right atrial enlargement will cause an apparent
increase in soft tissue opacity between the cranial cardiac base and the cranial mediastinum on the lateral
view (8:00 to 11:00 position). On the orthogonal view, a
bulge at the right cranial cardiac margin in the 9:00 to
11:00 position can be seen (Figures 6.20a, b). Secondary
to cardiac enlargement, the trachea will often be elevated, especially cranial to the hilus. On some occasions, especially with concurrent right ventricular
enlargement, the cardiac apex will be displaced to the

Table 6.11 Times corresponding to specific cardiac chambers using the clock-face analogy.
Lateral view

Time:
12:00 to 3:00
3:00 to 5:00
5:00 to 8:00
8:00 to 11:00

Cardiac chamber(s):
Left atrium
Left ventricle
Right ventricle
Right atrium, main pulmonary artery, ascending aorta and arch
(Continued)

K22463_C006.indd 179

23/04/16 1:28 pm

180

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 6.11 Times corresponding to specific cardiac chambers using the clock-face analogy. (Continued )
Ventrodorsal view

Time:
11:00 to 1:00
1:00 to 2:00
2:00 to 3:00
3:00 to 5:00
5:00 to 9:00
9:00 to 11:00
Center dial (between mainstem bronchi)

Cardiac chamber:
Aorta
Main pulmonary artery
Left auricle
Left ventricle
Right ventricle
Right atrium
Left atrium

left on the ventrodorsal/dorsoventral views. In general,
right atrial enlargement is more evident on the ventrodorsal view.
Right ventricular enlargement will cause a rounded
cranial margin on the lateral view that creates an
increase in the apparent width of the cardiac silhouette.
The heart will appear to contact an increased length
of sternum, although this can be a normal finding in
many breeds. A ‘reverse D’ shape is often described in
reference to right-sided enlargement on the ventrodorsal view. This shape is more specific for right ventricular ­enlargement, rather than atrial enlargement.
The reverse D is nonspecific for the underlying cause

of right ventricular enlargement, although it is often
described in cases of cardiac remodeling due to heartworm infection. When right ventricular enlargement
is severe, the cardiac apex as seen on the lateral view
will elevate. The enlarged cardiac silhouette will cause
tracheal elevation, similar to that seen with right atrial
enlargement (Figures 6.21a, b).

K22463_C006.indd 180

Radiographic appearance of left-sided
cardiomegaly
Left-sided cardiomegaly causes increased height of the
cardiac silhouette on the lateral view. Bulges in the cardiac silhouette are seen in the region of the left atrium

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

181

6.20

a

b

Figures 6.20a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of a puppy with marked right atrial enlargement due to tricuspid
insufficiency secondary to a dysplastic tricuspid valve. On the lateral view, the trachea is elevated cranial to its hilus (a, black arrows).
A bulge is present at the cranial cardiac base on the lateral view (a, white arrow) in the 8:00 to 11:00 position and at the right cranial
cardiac margin on the ventrodorsal view (b, white arrows) in the 9:00 to 11:00 position. Also, note the subjective decrease in size
of the pulmonary arteries and veins secondary to return flow of vascular volume into the right atrium rather than forward into the
main pulmonary artery and lungs.

and/or ventricle. Because of the prevalence of certain diseases in dogs and cats, left–sided cardiomegaly is more
common than purely right-sided. Additionally, most cardiomyopathies, which can affect the left or right heart,
tend to preferentially cause left-sided cardiomegaly.
With left atrial or left ventricular enlargement, the
caudal cardiac margin is flat on the lateral view. This
is often the first indication of mild enlargement. Left
atrial enlargement will cause a bulge at the caudal cardiac base (12:00 to 3:00 position) on the lateral view.
On the orthogonal view, the left atrium is not located
at the periphery of the cardiac silhouette, but is positioned between the mainstem bronchi, being superimposed over the cardiac silhouette analogous to the
center of the dial using the clock-face analogy. Left
atrial enlargement will cause widening of the angle
between the mainstem bronchi, creating a ‘U’ shape
rather than the normal ‘V’ shape. Sometimes, the caudal margin of an enlarged left atrium will create a well-­
defined rounded margin parallel to the cardiac apex on
the ventrodorsal view, referred to as the ‘double-­bubble
sign’. An enlarged left auricle is peripheral in location
along the cardiac silhouette on the ventrodorsal view

K22463_C006.indd 181

at the 2:00 to 3:00 position. Loss of the normal flat
­left-sided ­cardiac margin will be seen due to a bulge
created by left auricular enlargement. Secondary to left
atrial enlargement, the trachea will be elevated, similar
to that seen in right-sided cardiomegaly. However, in
the case of left atrial enlargement, the caudal mainstem
bronchi are additionally elevated (Figures 6.22a, b).
Left ventricular enlargement without concurrent
left atrial enlargement is uncommon. It is less apparent radiographically than left atrial enlargement. The
caudal cardiac margin will be flat, similar to left atrial
enlargement; however, with severe enlargement a
pronounced convexity may be seen. The heart will be
tall, encompassing greater than two-thirds of the dorsoventral diameter of the thorax on the lateral view
and elevating the caudal vena cava. The cardiac apex is
rounded and may be displaced towards the left on the
ventrodorsal view.

Generalized cardiomegaly
When the cardiac silhouette is generally enlarged
(instead of predominantly right sided or left sided), pericardial disease must be considered. Most often, if the left

23/04/16 1:28 pm

182

Diseases of specific organ systems

6.21

b

a

Figures 6.21a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of a dog with marked right ventricular enlargement due to severe
pulmonic stenosis. The trachea is elevated, being parallel to the spine. The cardiac silhouette is subjectively wide on the lateral view
(a, dotted black line) encompassing over four intercostal spaces. Increased sternal contact is present (a, black arrows). The apex
of the cardiac silhouette at the junction between the sternum and diaphragm is mildly elevated (a, double-headed black arrow).
The contour of the left margin of the cardiac silhouette is flat. The entire right cardiac margin is rounded with the ventricle (in the
5:00 to 9:00 position) being more peripheral than the atrium (b, white arrows) and creating a silhouette whose outline is reverse ‘D’
in shape (b, black outline surrounding the heart).
6.22

a

b

Figures 6.22a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of a dog with left atrial enlargement due to mitral valvular
degeneration. The heart often appears tall on the lateral view. The caudal cardiac margin is flat on the lateral view (a, white arrows).
A bulge is visible in the caudal cardiac base (a, black arrows). The trachea and mainstem bronchi are elevated (a, black dotted
arrows). On the ventrodorsal view, the angle between the mainstem bronchi is widened (b, black arrows). The caudal margin of the
enlarged left atrium is visible parallel to the cardiac apex (b, dotted black arrows). A left auricular bulge is visible peripherally along
the left cardiac margin (b, white arrows).

K22463_C006.indd 182

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

atrium is detected as enlarged, the cardiomegaly is due to
true heart enlargement rather than pericardial disease.
If the heart is markedly enlarged and globoid while a
dilated left atrium is not seen, pericardial disease/effusion should be ranked first. (Note: Severe right-sided
cardiomegaly is similar in appearance to pericardial effusion.) The various characteristics of cardiac enlargement
are listed in Tables 6.12–6.14.

Enlarged great vessels
Enlargement of the main pulmonary artery or aortic arch
can occur due to turbulent blood flow or an increase in
pressure downstream in the direction of the vascular
flow. Findings consistent with enlargement of great vessels should be correlated with additional abnormalities

Table 6.12 Eccentric versus concentric hypertrophy of the heart.
Eccentric hypertrophy

Concentric hypertrophy

Increased chamber volume
More radiographically
evident
Due to:
•• Volume overload
•• Myocardial dysfunction
caused by cardiomyopathy (DCM)
•• Coronary artery disease

Increased wall thickness/
decreased chamber volume
Not seen radiographically
until severe
Due to:
•• Pressure overload
•• Myocardial dysfunction
caused by some cardiomyopathies (e.g. HCM)

183

seen within the study (e.g. heart enlargement, peripheral
pulmonary vascular size, signs of failure) to decide on
likely differential diagnoses.
An enlarged main pulmonary artery will cause a
bulge in the cranial cardiac base (8:00 to 11:00 position) on the lateral view. This is also the location of the
aorta and right atrium. The ventrodorsal view must
be used to distinguish these three potential causes of
a cardiac bulge in this location. On the ventrodorsal
view, an enlarged main pulmonary artery causes a
bulge in the left cranial cardiac margin at the 1:00 to
2:00 position (Figures 6.23a, b). The two main causes
of a dilated main pulmonary artery are turbulent flow
(poststenotic d
­ ilatation secondary to pulmonic stenosis
or patent ductus arteriosus [PDA]) or congestion due
to pulmonary hypertension. All causes of an enlarged
main ­pulmonary artery can result in right-sided cardiomegaly. ­The main distinguishing factor among the differential diagnoses is the appearance of the ­peripheral
pulmonary vasculature (Table 6.15).
An enlarged aortic arch will cause a bulge in a similar
location to that of right atrial and main pulmonary arterial enlargement on the lateral view at the cranial cardiac base (8:00 to 11:00 position). On the orthogonal view,
enlargement of the aortic arch will appear as a bulge in
the cranial cardiac margin at the 11:00 to 1:00 position.
Often, aortic arch enlargement will appear as a widening of the caudal aspect of the cranial mediastinum.
Enlargement of the aortic arch is most often caused by

Table 6.13 Causes of right-sided cardiomegaly.
Right atrium

Right ventricle

Chamber dilation only (eccentric hypertrophy):
•• Volume overload due to:
○○ Insufficient/dysplastic tricuspid valve
○○ Atrial septal defect
•• Pressure overload due to stenotic tricuspid valve
Right atrial mass (e.g. hemangiosarcoma)

Chamber dilation (eccentric hypertrophy):
•• Volume overload due to:
○○ Tricuspid valvular insufficiency
○○ Pulmonic valvular insufficiency
○○ Atrial septal defect
○○ Overhydration
○○ Myocardial failure (arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy)
•• Chronic anemia
•• Athletic heart
•• Cardiac conduction abnormalities
Wall thickening (concentric hypertrophy):
•• Pressure overload due to:
○○ Pulmonic stenosis
○○ Pulmonary hypertension (cor pulmonale)
○○ Heartworm disease
○○ Tetralogy of Fallot
•• Cardiomyopathy (HCM)

K22463_C006.indd 183

23/04/16 1:28 pm

184

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 6.14 Causes of left-sided cardiomegaly.
Left atrium

Left ventricle

Chamber dilation only (eccentric hypertrophy):
•• Volume overload due to:
○○ Insufficient/dysplastic mitral valve
○○ Left-to-right shunts (PDA, VSD, ASD)
•• Pressure overload (stenotic mitral valve)

Chamber dilation (eccentric hypertrophy):
•• Volume overload due to:
○○ Mitral valvular insufficiency
○○ Aortic valvular insufficiency
○○ Left-to-right shunts: PDA, VSD, ASD
○○ Overhydration
•• Myocardial failure (cardiomyopathy [dilated])
•• Chronic anemia
•• Athletic heart
•• Cardiac conduction disturbances
Wall thickening (concentric hypertrophy):
•• Pressure overload due to:
○○ Aortic stenosis
○○ Systemic hypertension
•• Cardiomyopathy (HCM)
6.23

a

b

Figures 6.23a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of a dog with radiographically evident main pulmonary artery
enlargement. An increased convexity is present at the cranial cardiac base on the lateral view (a, white arrows). A large focal bulge is
present at the left cranial cardiac margin on the ventrodorsal view in the region of the main pulmonary artery (1:00 to 2:00 position;
b, white arrows).
Table 6.15 Differential diagnoses and distinguishing factors for main pulmonary artery (MPA) enlargement.
Radiographic findings

Primary differential

Dilated MPA + small peripheral pulmonary vasculature

Pulmonic stenosis

Dilated MPA + dilated peripheral pulmonary arteries

Pulmonary hypertension (primary or secondary to heartworm
infection)

Dilated MPA + dilated peripheral arteries and veins

Patent ductus arteriosus

K22463_C006.indd 184

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

turbulent flow and poststenotic dilatation secondary to
aortic stenosis (Figures 6.24a, b).
Aortic enlargement can also occur at the level of the
proximal descending aorta. Enlargement in this location is radiographically distinct from enlargement of the
aortic arch due to aortic stenosis and is almost pathognomonic for a PDA. The enlargement is due to turbulent
flow caused by abnormal blood flow between the main
pulmonary artery and aorta that occurs at the proximal
descending aorta. This finding is most evident on the
ventrodorsal view (Figure 6.25).
The caudal vena cava should be less than 1.5 times the
width of the aorta. An enlarged caudal vena cava is most
often due to congestion from right-sided heart failure.
Radiographic changes consistent with right-sided cardiomegaly may be concurrently evident. The cranial vena
cava is not seen as a distinct structure separate from other
soft tissue opacities within the cranial mediastinum,
therefore its enlargement is not radiographically visible.

Pulmonary arteries and veins
Differential diagnoses for cardiac enlargement should
always be considered in combination with pulmonary
vascular appearance. Pulmonary venous enlargement,

185

pulmonary arterial enlargement, and combination
­pulmonary arterial and venous enlargement or hypovascularity have entirely separate differential diagnoses. The differential diagnoses for pulmonary
arterial and/or venous enlargements are summarized
in Table 6.16.
The pulmonary arteries and veins are paired and surround the lobar bronchi, creating a triad of artery, bronchus, and vein. On the lateral view, the arteries are always
located dorsal to the bronchus and the veins are located
ventral. The size of the cranial lobar arteries and veins is
best assessed on a lateral thoracic radiograph and should
be similar in diameter to each other and to the proximal
aspect of the 4th rib. The caudal lobar arteries and veins
are best assessed on the ventrodorsal/dorsoventral view.
The caudal lobar arteries are peripherally located relative
to the bronchi and veins. As such the veins are centrally
located and are said to be ‘central and ventral’ within the
triad of artery, bronchus, and vein on the radiographic
views. The size of the caudal lobar pulmonary arteries
and veins can be compared with the diameter of the 9th
ribs as they cross on the ventrodorsal view; they should
be similar in size to each other and to the 9th rib at the
location of their crossing. If the pulmonary arteries and

6.24

a

b

Figures 6.24a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of a dog with an enlarged aortic arch due to a poststenotic
dilatation from subaortic stenosis. On the lateral view, a focal bulge is seen at the cranial cardiac base in the 8:00 to 11:00 position
(a, white arrows). On the ventrodorsal view, an increase in soft tissue opacity is seen at the caudal aspect of the cranial mediastinum
associated with the 11:00 to 1:00 position of the cardiac silhouette (b, white arrows).

K22463_C006.indd 185

23/04/16 1:28 pm

186

Diseases of specific organ systems

veins are normal in size, the summation of the vasculature crossing the rib will form a square.

Congestive heart failure
Right-sided congestive heart failure is the inability of
the heart (specifically the right atrium) to accommodate blood volume returning from systemic circulation.
Increased right atrial pressure causes those vascular
structures draining into the right atrium from the systemic circulation (cranial vena cava, caudal vena cava,
lymphatics) to become congested and unable to transmit blood volume forward into the heart. The compensatory mechanisms of the heart are overwhelmed and
this results in congestive failure. Right-sided cardiomegaly does not automatically imply right heart failure;
­however, when right-sided c­ ardiomegaly is diagnosed

6.25

radiographically, the interpreter must e­valuate for
evidence of failure. Radiographic signs indicating
­
right-sided heart failure are shown in Box 6.11 and
Figure 6.26.
Left-sided congestive heart failure is the inability of
the heart (specifically the left atrium) to accommodate
blood volume returning from pulmonary circulation.
Increased left atrial pressure causes those vascular structures draining into the left atrium (i.e. the pulmonary

Table 6.16 Differential diagnoses for abnormal pulmonary
vascular size.
Dilated pulmonary veins
Elevated left atrial pressure (e.g. mitral insufficiency,
cardiomyopathy)
Dilated pulmonary arteries
Arteritis secondary to parasitic infection (e.g. heartworm
infection)
Pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary thromboembolism
Dilated pulmonary arteries and veins
Left-to-right shunting of blood (PDA, VSD, ASD)
Volume overload
Chronic or severe mitral valvular disease (pulmonary venous
dilation expected prior to arterial dilation)
Small pulmonary arteries and veins
Hypovolemia
Shock
Severe pulmonic stenosis
Tricuspid dysplasia or severe tricuspid insufficiency
Right-to-left shunts:
•• Reverse PDA
•• VSD combined with pulmonic stenosis or pulmonary
hypertension
•• Tetralogy of Fallot

Box 6.11 Radiographic findings of right heart failure
include right-sided cardiomegaly or pericardial disease in
combination with one or more of:
•• Dilated caudal vena cava
•• Generalized hepatomegaly
•• Peritoneal effusion
•• Pleural effusion (cats)*
Figure 6.25 Ventrodorsal radiograph of a dog with
enlargement of the proximal descending aorta secondary
to a patent ductus arteriosus. The proximal aspect of the
descending aorta has a focal convexity at the level of the
proximal descending aorta (black arrows) that is distinct from
aortic arch enlargement due to aortic stenosis. (Compare with
Figure 6.24b.)

K22463_C006.indd 186

* In dogs, effusion occurring in the pleural space due
to right heart failure occurs only after effusion in the
peritoneal space. Therefore, peritoneal effusion or
bicavitary effusion has a differential diagnosis of right
heart failure, but pleural effusion alone is not typically
caused by right heart failure.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

6.26

187

Box 6.12 Radiographic findings of left heart failure
include left-sided cardiomegaly in combination with one or
more of:
•• Dilated pulmonary veins
•• Cardiogenic pulmonary edema:
○○ As pulmonary venous dilation and congestion
­progress, the increased pressure causes edema within
the pulmonary interstitium. As edema worsens, the
pulmonary pattern becomes alveolar
○○ Dogs: cardiogenic edema centered in perihilar/caudal
lung lobe regions – symmetrical or asymmetrical
○○ Cats: cardiogenic edema has multifocal distribution
and can be anywhere

Figure 6.26 Lateral radiograph of a dog with right-sided
cardiac failure due to pulmonic stenosis and tricuspid dysplasia.
The caudal vena cava is dilated and fails to taper towards
the diaphragm (between white arrows). The liver is enlarged,
causing caudal displacement of the gastric axis (dotted white
arrow). Peritoneal effusion is present, causing soft tissue
opaque streaking and a decrease in detail of visible abdominal
structures (black arrows). These findings combined with an
enlarged, wide cardiac silhouette are indicative of right-sided
heart failure.

veins) to become congested and unable to transmit blood
volume forward. The compensatory mechanisms of the
heart are overwhelmed and this results in congestive
failure with excess blood volume in the pulmonary veins.
­Left-sided cardiomegaly does not imply left heart failure.
The radiographic study must be specifically evaluated for
indications of failure, which include dilated pulmonary
veins and cardiogenic edema characterized by interstitial or alveolar pulmonary opacity typically having a
perihilar/caudodorsal distribution. The edema is most
often symmetrical, but can be asymmetrical as well. An
asymmetrical distribution tends to occur most often secondary to mitral valvular disease. Radiographic signs
indicating left-sided heart failure are listed in Box 6.12
and Figures 6.27a–c. In cats, the regional distribution
of cardiogenic edema is often less predictable and can
be diffuse or multifocal (Figures 6.28a, b). Additionally,
although the mechanism is unclear, pleural effusion often
accompanies cardiogenic edema in cases of left-sided failure in cats. This is not a feature seen in dogs, where only
right-sided heart failure causes pleural effusion.

Pericardial effusion
The most common causes of pericardial effusion are idiopathic or due to neoplasia such as right atrial hemangiosarcoma, heart base chemodectoma, or mesothelioma.

K22463_C006.indd 187

Pericardial fluid increases pressure within the pericardium, which can overwhelm the right atrial and ventricular pressure and result in cardiac tamponade and
right-sided heart failure. The radiographic signs associated with pericardial effusion are summarized in Box 6.13
and Figures 6.29a, b. Effusion within the pericardial
space creates a globoid cardiac silhouette, which, when
severe, precludes the visibility of normal cardiac chambers. A key feature differentiating pericardial effusion
from generalized cardiomegaly is the absence of visible
left atrial dilation. Severe right-sided cardiomegaly and
pericardial effusion can appear radiographically similar.
Smaller volumes of effusion have the potential for causing cardiac tamponade, with normal cardiac chambers
still being visible radiographically, especially in acute
cases. Secondary signs of right-sided heart failure are
often seen at the time of diagnosis as part of the presenting complaint. Clinically significant pleural effusion that
is severe enough to cause right heart failure is rare in
cats. Small volumes of pericardial effusion are often seen
in cats presenting with heart failure secondary to feline
cardiomyopathy.
Microcardia is a small heart due to decreased systemic venous return. Causes are similar to those for
small pulmonary arteries and veins and include shock,
dehydration/hypovolemia, hypoadrenocorticism, overinflated lungs, pneumothorax, and obstructed venous flow.
Microcardia is often accompanied by a consistently small
vena cava in addition to decreased pulmonary vascular
diameter.

Lungs
Alveolar pulmonary pattern
Three descriptive hallmarks are seen with alveolar disease of any cause: air bronchogram, lobar sign, and border
effacement. Having any one of these three would classify
the pulmonary pattern as alveolar; however, often not all

23/04/16 1:28 pm

188

Diseases of specific organ systems

6.28

6.27

a

b

c
Figures 6.27a–c Lateral (a), ventrodorsal (b), and
dorsoventral (c) radiographs of a dog with left-sided
cardiac failure due to mitral valvular insufficiency. The cranial
lobar veins are increased in size (a, between black arrows).
The caudal lobar vasculature is partially obscured by an
increase in pulmonary opacity located in the perihilar and
caudodorsal lungs and is more severe on the right side
(b, white arrows). On the dorsoventral view, the dilated
caudal lobar pulmonary veins (c, black arrows) are more
clearly seen relative to the normal pulmonary arteries
(c, white arrowheads). These findings, combined with a tall
cardiac silhouette and marked left atrial enlargement, indicate
left-sided cardiac failure.

K22463_C006.indd 188

a

b
Figures 6.28a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal
(b) radiographs of a cat with left-sided congestive heart
failure due to cardiomyopathy. The regional distribution of
cardiogenic edema is multifocal and predominantly ventral,
causing partial border effacement of the cardiac silhouette.
Cardiac enlargement can be assumed due to dorsal elevation
of the trachea and the visibility of atrial enlargement on
the ventrodorsal view. Additionally, evidence of mild pleural
effusion is visible where lungs are retracted from the thoracic
wall and small pleural fissure lines are present (black arrows).
Pleural fluid is a common finding in cats with left-sided cardiac
failure.

Box 6.13 Radiographic appearance of pericardial effusion.
•• Globoid cardiac silhouette.
○○ Cardiomegaly without ­radiographic evidence of
­specific chamber enlargements
•• Right-sided heart failure:
○○ Dilated caudal vena cava
○○ Generalized hepatomegaly
○○ Peritoneal effusion
○○ Pleural effusion

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

189

6.29

a

b

Figures 6.29a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs of a dog with marked pericardial effusion. The cardiac silhouette is
globoid with no evidence of specific enlarged chambers. Note the absence of visible left atrial enlargement (a, white arrows). Right
heart failure is also present, denoted by poor abdominal serosal detail and pleural effusion (retraction of lungs from the thoracic
wall by fluid; a, black arrows).

hallmarks are present. An air bronchogram occurs when
alveoli are not aerated (i.e. they contain fluid [edema,
hemorrhage, pus]) or are collapsed while the bronchi
remain aerated. Its appearance is likened to a ‘tree in a
snowstorm’, where the branching lucent bronchus is evident against a white backdrop. A lobar sign occurs when
alveolar disease is peripheral relative to lobar margins
and inconsistent among lung lobes. This allows the margin of the lung lobe to be evident as a relatively distinct
line between an affected lobe that is adjacent to a more
aerated lobe. Border effacement is the most consistently
present hallmark of alveolar disease. When objects are
effaced, their margins can no longer be delineated. In
order for this to occur, the objects have to be identical
in opacity (usually both are soft tissue/fluid opaque)
and they have to be in direct physical contact with each
other. When alveolar disease is present, fluid within alveoli, which is identical in opacity to the heart, pulmonary
vasculature, and bronchial walls, contacts any of these
structures such that their margins are no longer distinguishable. The hallmarks of alveolar disease are depicted
in Figures 6.30a–d.
The first descriptive discriminator in differentiating causes of alveolar disease is lung size. A decrease in
lung size due to collapse of airways is called atelectasis.

K22463_C006.indd 189

Atelectasis results in an increase in pulmonary opacity
and decreased lung volume seen as a mediastinal shift
towards the opaque lung (ispilateral mediastinal shift)
and ipsilateral cranial positioning of the diaphragm.
Atelectasis can be due to obstructive or nonobstructive
causes. Obstructive (or resorption) atelectasis occurs
when the diameter of the airway is reduced or blocked,
most commonly from mucus plugging, bronchial wall
inflammation, or a neoplastic mass. The reduction in
diameter may be luminal, mural, or extramural in origin; regardless, trapped gas is resorbed and not replaced,
resulting in decreased lung volume. This form of atelectasis is most commonly seen in cats with bronchial disease,
resulting in mucus plugging and so-called right middle
lung lobe syndrome or atelectasis of the right middle
lung lobe. Nonobstructive atelectasis may be due to compression/relaxation, surfactant deficiency, or loss of pulmonary compliance due to cicatrization (e.g. fibrosis of
pleura limiting lung expansion).
When not caused by atelectasis, alveolar disease is typically caused by fluid accumulation (edema, hemorrhage,
or pus) or cells (granuloma or neoplasia) within alveoli.
The regional distribution is the most effective means of
distinguishing these, as shown in Table 6.17. Pulmonary
edema can be caused by cardiogenic or noncardiogenic

23/04/16 1:28 pm

190

Diseases of specific organ systems

6.30

a

b

c

d

Figures 6.30a–d Lateral projection (a) with accompanying schematic (b) and ventrodorsal projection (c) with
accompanying schematic (d) radiographs of a dog with alveolar pulmonary disease within the right middle and left cranial lung
lobes due to aspiration pneumonia. All the hallmarks of alveolar disease are evident. Air bronchograms can be seen as gray
branching structures (b, d, highlighted in gray) against a white backdrop and are visible on both projections, in this case. Lobar signs
(b, d, white arrows) are visible between the right middle lung lobe and the more aerated adjacent lobes. Finally, border effacement
prevents the ability to see the right and left cranial cardiac margins (b, d, black arrows) and margins of vasculature/bronchi within
the affected lobes.

K22463_C006.indd 190

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

191

Table 6.17 Regional distribution of lung diseases resulting in an alveolar pulmonary pattern.
Cause of alveolar pattern

Regional distribution

Aspiration or bronchopneumonia (Figure 6.30)

Ventral to trachea

Cardiogenic pulmonary edema (Figures 6.27, 6.28)

Perihilar/caudodorsal/diffuse
Multifocal in cats
Peribronchial in dogs with DCM

Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema

Caudodorsal

Hemorrhage:
•• Trauma
•• Coagulopathy

Variable
Variable/caudodorsal

Interstitial pneumonia

Caudodorsal/diffuse

Pulmonary thromboembolism

Variable

Atelectasis

Often ventral to trachea/variable

Primary lung tumor

Lobar/caudal lobes/variable

mechanisms. The causes of the latter category are listed
in Box 6.14.

Interstitial pulmonary pattern
The interstitial pulmonary pattern is subcategorized into
structured and unstructured. The unstructured interstitial
pulmonary pattern is notoriously difficult to diagnose, as
the appearance of the interstitium is greatly influenced
by technical factors; additionally, it may indicate active
or past disease. An unstructured interstitial pulmonary
pattern is described by an increase in pulmonary opacity that is less intense per unit area when compared with
alveolar disease, such that margins of vessels are less
delineated but not totally effaced (Figures 6.31a–d). Any
disease resulting in an alveolar pulmonary pattern can
appear as an unstructured interstitial pulmonary pattern
with a similar regional distribution. As the evolution of
fluid changes from less to more severe or as resolution
occurs with treatment, a shift can be seen from interstitial
to alveolar and from alveolar to interstitial, respectively.
Therefore, the distribution and differential diagnoses for
interstitial disease can be described as given above for
alveolar disease. Additionally, in cases of an unstructured
pulmonary pattern that is distributed diffusely, fibrosis,
neoplasia (lymphoma, hemangiosarcoma), or hematogenous pneumonitis (infectious/noninfectious inflammatory) should be considered.
The structured pulmonary pattern is reserved for any
nodular or mass lesion(s) seen within the lung. This pattern can be relatively intense per unit area, depending on
the size of the nodule. The difference between a nodule

K22463_C006.indd 191

Box 6.14 Causes of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
•• Upper airway obstruction
•• Head trauma
•• Electrocution
•• Uncontrolled seizures
•• Hypoglycemia
•• Thoracic trauma
•• Smoke inhalation
•• Near drowning
•• Acute lung injury/acute respiratory distress syndrome
○○ Acute interstitial pneumonia/pneumonitis
○○ Systemic inflammatory response syndrome
○○ Pancreatitis
○○ Sepsis
○○ Uremia

and a mass is strictly size – a mass is 3 cm or greater.
Masses and nodules are best delineated from other lesions
of high intensity per unit area (e.g. alveolar lung disease)
by the rounded, sometimes well-defined margins seen
with structured interstitial disease. The main differential
diagnoses for this pulmonary pattern are summarized
in Table 6.18. Granulomatous pneumonia tends to occur
in younger animals and the nodules tend to be of a similar size with indistinct margins. Sometimes, nodules can
appear very small, creating a miliary type of pulmonary
pattern (Figure 6.32). Multiple nodules due to metastatic
disease tend to occur in older animals. The nodules are
more often variable in size with well-defined margins.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

192

Diseases of specific organ systems

6.31

a

b

c

d

Figures 6.31a–d Unstructured interstitial pulmonary pattern. Lateral (a) and close-up (c) radiographs of a dog with confirmed
uremic pneumonitis creating an interstitial pulmonary pattern. Lateral (b) and close-up (d) radiographs of a normal dog not having
clinical respiratory disease are shown for comparison. The caudodorsal distribution of pulmonary opacity makes noncardiogenic
pulmonary edema more likely, which is a typical appearance for acute lung injury due to uremic pneumonitis.

Table 6.18 Differential diagnoses for a structured interstitial pulmonary pattern.
Description

Differential diagnoses

Multiple soft tissue nodules

Metastasis, granulomatous ­pneumonia, septic emboli, parasitic (e.g. Paragonimus kellicotti ), cysts,
artifactual (end-on vasculature, superimposed superficial nipple or debris)

Solitary soft tissue nodule
or mass

Primary tumor, single metastasis, granuloma (foreign body), abscess, fluid-filled cyst, artifactual
(see above)

Multiple or single cavitary
nodule(s)/mass(es)

Thick-walled: neoplasia (primary or metastatic), abscess, ­granuloma, parasitic
Thin-walled: bulla, cyst, airway dilation (bronchus/­bronchiectasis, alveoli/emphysema)

Single or multiple mineral
nodule(s)

Pulmonary osteomas, chronic fungal granulomas, rarely parasitic nodules or neoplasia

Multiple mineralized pulmonary nodules, called pulmonary osteomas, pulmonary osteomata, or heterotopic

K22463_C006.indd 192

bone, occur as a benign finding in dogs, especially Boxers
and Shetland Sheepdogs. They are often in higher

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Approach to thoracic radiographs

193

6.33

6.32

Figure 6.32 Lateral thoracic radiograph with magnified
inset in a dog with a miliary structured interstitial pulmonary
pattern due to blastomycosis. The nodules are very small,
resembling an accumulation of millet seeds, and have very
indistinct margins reflecting active inflammation. The diagnosis
was achieved with lung fine-needle aspiration.

Figure 6.33 Lateral thoracic radiograph of a Shetland
Sheepdog presented for a metastasis check. Numerous,
well-defined mineralized nodules are present. Many of these
nodules are less than 3 mm in size, yet are highly visible,
supporting suspicion of mineralized benign pulmonary
osteomas. On close inspection of the magnified inset, the
nodules are highly irregularly marginated rather than being
round in shape.

numbers ventrally and only a few millimeters in size. True
soft tissue opaque nodules of this size would be poorly
detected on radiographs, so when a nodule that is 3 mm
or less is visible on radiographs, the interpreter must consider a mineralized nodule or end-on vessel. Additionally,
these mineralized pulmonary osteomas are typically
irregularly marginated when inspected closely, also distinguishing them from many soft tissue opaque nodules.
As mentioned, pulmonary osteomas are benign and can
be quite numerous (Figure 6.33). Mineralized malignant
nodules are extremely rare in veterinary medicine.
Regardless of whether or not the interstitial pulmonary pattern is structured or unstructured, a definitive
diagnosis is most often determined via lung aspiration
rather than airway sampling.

pattern when normal bronchi are noticed, especially
if clinical signs such as coughing are present. Seeing
bronchi does not make the study abnormal. Disease can
be assumed, however, when the bronchi are thickened,
irregular, and/or indistinct in margination. Irregular and
thickened bronchial walls create the so-called tram tracks
and rings within the lungs (Figures 6.34a, b).
In addition to bronchial walls being thickened and
irregular when radiographically visible disease is present, bronchi can fail to taper because of bronchiectasis
(Figure 6.35). Bronchiectasis is important to recognize as
an irreversible sequela of chronic airway-related disease
and as a predisposing factor for future airway-related
symptoms and bronchopneumonia.

Bronchial pulmonary pattern
The bronchial pulmonary pattern implies disease that
is airway related. Fluid or cells infiltrate bronchial walls
and result in radiographically evident thickening. In
most cases, the ailment affecting the bronchus extends
into surrounding peribronchial interstitium. In some
cases, the infiltration may be limited to peribronchial
interstitium; however, airway-related disease remains
the most common underlying cause. It is a common mistake for inexperienced interpreters to assign a bronchial

K22463_C006.indd 193

Vascular pulmonary pattern
This pattern is reserved for cases where the pulmonary
arteries and/or veins are too big or too small. Many do not
consider this a true pulmonary pattern. If arteries and/or
veins are enlarged or small, causes of cardiopulmonary
vascular disease should be pursued as discussed above
(Heart, great vessels, and pericardium). The most common cause of a vascular pulmonary pattern in endemic
regions is heartworm infection. The characteristic radiographic changes associated with heartworm disease are
described in Box 6.15.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

194

Diseases of specific organ systems

6.34

b

a

Figures 6.34a, b Lateral radiograph (a) and magnified inset (b) of a dog with chronic bronchial disease. The bronchial
walls seen in the longitudinal orientation (b, white arrows) and those seen end-on (b, black arrows) are thick and irregular,
creating the tram-tracks and rings expected with bronchial disease. The walls are thinner and more irregular than adjacent
pulmonary vasculature (between white arrowheads). A noninfectious, inflammatory airway condition was determined based on
bronchoalveolar lavage.
6.35

Figure 6.35 Left lateral radiograph of a dog with a chronic
cough of 11 years’ duration. Increased irregular, well-defined
linear and ring markings are present in all lung lobes, consistent
with a chronic bronchial pattern. Multiple bronchi fail to taper
at the periphery of the lung (black arrows). The tubular shape
of the bronchi is consistent with cylindrical bronchiectasis.
Enlarged, dilated rings are also visible dorsally, consistent with
bronchiectasis viewed end-on. Focal ventral alveolar disease
is also present, consistent with bronchopneumonia (white
arrowheads), a common predisposing factor and sequela seen
in cases of bronchiectasis.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Dennis R, Kirkberger RM, Wrigley RH et al. (2001) Handbook
of Small Animal Radiological Differential Diagnosis. WB
Saunders, London.

K22463_C006.indd 194

Box 6.15 Radiographic appearance of heartworm
infection.
•• Right ventricular enlargement:
○○ Concentric nature of hypertrophy makes radiographic
detection insensitive until severe
○○ Lateral view: wide cardiac silhouette, increased
­sternal contact, elevated cardiac apex
○○ Ventrodorsal view: bulge in 5:00 to 9:00 position at
the right cardiac margin
•• Main pulmonary arterial enlargement:
○○ Lateral view: bulge in the 8:00 to 11:00 position at the
cranial cardiac base
○○ Ventrodorsal view: bulge in the 1:00 to 2:00 position
at the left cranial cardiac margin
•• Peripheral pulmonary arterial enlargement
•• Pulmonary eosinophilic inflammation:
○○ Peribronchial interstitial to alveolar pulmonary
opacity
○○ Multifocal nodular pulmonary pattern in some cases
•• Right-sided heart failure:
○○ Dilated caudal vena cava
○○ Generalized hepatomegaly
○○ Peritoneal effusion
○○ Pleural effusion
Kealy JK, McAllister H, Graham JP (2011) Diagnostic Radiology
and Ultrasonography of the Dog and Cat. Saunders, St. Louis.
Suter PF (1984) Thoracic Radiography: A Text Atlas
of Thoracic Diseases of the Dog and Cat. Wettswil,
Switzerland.
Thrall DE (2013) Textbook of Veterinary Diagnostic Radiology.
Saunders, St. Louis.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

195

Chapter 7
Cardiovascular disorders
Romain Pariaut & Carley Saelinger

HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Introduction
Cardiovascular disease is common in dogs and cats, and
a thorough history and physical examination are crucial
steps in making the diagnosis of heart disease. They not
only can assist in differentiating respiratory from cardiac
disease, but also help determine the severity of the disease and response to therapy.

Signalment
Age, breed, and sex are useful information to establish a
short list of differential diagnoses. Young animals tend to
present with congenital defects, while acquired diseases
should be suspected in older animals. There are known
breed predispositions and males are more susceptible
to certain diseases. However, there are exceptions in all
of these cases and care should be taken not to exclude
diseases simply from signalment. Signalment in combination with heart murmur characteristics and pulse quality are particularly useful to shorten differential lists in
­puppies with congenital heart disease.

History
A thorough history should include questions about onset,
duration, and progression of presenting signs; current
medications and the response to those medications;
travel history and possible infectious disease exposure;
and concurrent medical problems.

Presenting complaints
Common presenting signs of cardiac disease include
tachypnea, dyspnea, cough, exercise intolerance, syncope,
abdominal swelling, decreased appetite, weight loss, cyanosis, paresis/paralysis, and poor growth.

Tachypnea/dyspnea
Tachypnea is an overly rapid respiratory rate. Owners of
pets with cardiac disease should be instructed to keep a
resting respiratory rate log at home, and this should be
reviewed as part of the history. If the resting respiratory
rate is steadily increasing, or is >40 bpm, cardiogenic

K22463_C007.indd 195

pulmonary edema should be suspected in animals
previously diagnosed with cardiac disease. Dyspnea
­
is labored breathing and can be caused by p
­rimary
respiratory disease or decompensated cardiac disease.
Caution should be taken with dyspneic animals as they
may quickly become unstable if placed in a stressful
environment.

Cough
Cats rarely cough with cardiac disease, although it is
reported with heartworm infection. However, cough is
the most common complaint in dogs with cardiac disease.
It is important to differentiate cough due to cardiac disease from that due to respiratory causes. A high-pitched
or honking cough is more commonly associated with
tracheobronchial collapse, whereas dogs with heart disease will tend to have an intermittent, harsh, low pitched
cough, which may be more prominent at night. Cough can
be more specific of congestive heart failure (CHF) in large
breed dogs than in small breeds.

Syncope
Syncope is a loss of consciousness associated with
decreased cerebral blood flow. It is important to differentiate syncope from seizures. Syncopal episodes are
­generally brief and the animal is normal immediately
preceding and following the episode. Syncope has a
­variety of causes (Table 7.1).
Table 7.1 Causes of syncope in dogs and cats.
Arrhythmia:
•• Bradyarrhythmia: high-grade second-degree
­atrioventricular block, third-degree atrioventricular block,
sick sinus syndrome
•• Tachyarrhythmia: sustained supraventricular tachycardia,
ventricular tachycardia
Severe pulmonary hypertension
Vasovagal syncope associated with coughing, urination,
defecation
Systemic hypotension: may be induced by vasodilatory
therapy
Severe decrease in cardiac output
Cardiac tamponade

23/04/16 1:06 pm

196

Diseases of specific organ systems

Abdominal distension
Abdominal swelling is due to ascites, the cardiac causes
of which include right-sided heart disease, pericardial
effusion, constrictive pericardial disease, severe pulmonary hypertension (PH), and obstructions to venous
return. Ascites develops secondary to congestion in the
liver and spleen. It can lead to dyspnea and tachypnea
because of increased pressure on the diaphragm, as
well as decreased appetite due to abdominal discomfort.
Increased intra-abdominal pressure impairs renal blood
flow and intestinal absorption of nutrients and drugs.

Weight loss/cachexia
Cardiac cachexia is a generalized loss of muscle, bone,
and adipose tissue mass secondary to CHF. It is due
to a ­
catabolic/anabolic imbalance and carries a poor
­prognosis. High calorie diets and more frequent feeding
are often required to limit the effects of cardiac cachexia.
Patients with ascites usually develop more profound and
rapid cardiac cachexia.

Cyanosis
Cyanosis is associated with decreased oxygenation of
blood and leads to blue-tinged mucous membranes
(Figure 7.1). Cyanosis is most commonly seen secondary
to cardiac defects leading to right-to-left blood shunting,
although it can also be due to severe left heart failure

7.1

or respiratory disease. There will often be a concurrent
polycythemia.

Paresis
Paresis is most commonly seen in cats with arterial
thromboembolic disease. The limb affected depends on
the location of the thromboembolus.

Physical examination
The physical examination should begin with inspection
from a distance, to collect information on respiratory status and mentation.

Examination of the mucous membranes
Mucous membrane color and perfusion should be examined. Cyanosis is due to poor ventilation or alveolar
­diffusion. Pallor can indicate anemia, hypoxemia, or poor
perfusion, and hyperemia may indicate polycythemia or
sepsis. The color of the oral mucous membranes should
be compared with caudal membranes to assess for differential cyanosis, which is characteristic of a right-to-left
­patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). Capillary refill time (CRT)
is a poor indicator of tissue perfusion. It is considered
normal when it is less than 2 seconds.

Palpation of the pulses
The femoral pulse should be evaluated in every patient.
The palpated pulse pressure is determined by the difference between systolic and diastolic pressures and the
rate at which pressure reaches its peak systolic value.
For example, a large difference between diastolic and
systolic pressures, or a rapid rise of pressure, results in a
‘bounding’ or ‘hyperdynamic’ pulse. Pulse quality cannot
be used to estimate actual arterial blood pressure values.
Both femoral pulses should be evaluated and the pulse
rate compared with the auscultated heart rate. The detection of changes in pulse quality and pattern can help
establish a list of differential diagnoses (Table 7.2).

Examination of the jugular veins

Figure 7.1 Cyanosis in a dog with a right-to-left intracardiac
shunt.

K22463_C007.indd 196

The jugular veins should be examined while the animal
is standing with its head in a neutral position. Any pulse
extending above the lower third of the neck is considered
abnormal and may be due to right-sided CHF, pulmonic
stenosis (PS), severe PH, pericardial disease, heartworm
disease, or arrhythmias. In addition to abnormal pulses,
generalized jugular distension may be noted. This finding indicates increased systemic venous pressures secondary to right heart failure, pericardial disease, or
cranial vena cava obstruction that can occur with mediastinal or heart base masses. The hepatojugular reflux

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

197

Table 7.2 Description of pulses and their causes.
Pulse type

Description

Cause

Bounding/hyperkinetic

‘Water hammer’ forceful pulse

Aortic insufficiency, PDA, thyrotoxicosis, anemia

Pulsus bisferiens (bifid)

Double pulse for each beat

HOCM, SAS, aortic insufficiency

Pulsus alternans

Alternating pulse strength with each beat

Severe myocardial disease

Pulsus paradoxus

Inspiration is associated with weakened or absent pulse

Pericardial effusion and tamponade

Pulsus parvus et tardus

Delayed onset of pulse and weak pulse

SAS

Pulsus bigeminus

Pulses come in pairs with pause between each pair and the
second pulse weaker than the first

Bigeminal arrhythmias

Pulse deficits

Auscultated heart beats do not have coinciding pulse

Arrhythmias

Hypokinetic pulses

Weak and difficult to palpate

Hypotension, hypovolemia, SAS,
congestive heart failure

Absent pulses

No pulse palpated

Thromboembolism

PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; HOCM, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy; SAS, subaortic stenosis.

sign, which corresponds to a distension of the jugular
veins when pressure is applied to the cranial abdomen,
can be seen with right-sided heart disease and occurs due
to the inability of the diseased heart to compensate for
the increased return of blood occurring during abdominal compression (Figure 7.2).

7.2

Palpation
The apex beat should be felt most strongly on the left side
of the thorax between the 4th and 6th intercostal spaces.
The apex beat may be shifted due to cardiac enlargement,
intrathoracic masses, collapsed lung lobes, diaphragmatic
hernias, or sternal abnormalities. A decreased intensity
of the apex beat may be secondary to pericardial effusion,
pleural effusion, pneumothorax, diaphragmatic hernia,
thoracic masses, or obesity. A precordial thrill, a localized
vibration of the chest caused by turbulent blood flow, can
be felt when a severe murmur is present.

Auscultation
Auscultation should be performed in a quiet room
with both the bell (for low-frequency sounds) and diaphragm (for high-frequency sounds) of the stethoscope.
Auscultation should be performed in a systematic manner, evaluating all areas of the thorax and each valve
region (Table 7.3). The animal should be in a standing
position for auscultation. The heart and lungs should be
auscultated separately to avoid confusing or overlooking abnormal sounds. Heart rate and rhythm should be
noted, as well as the presence or absence of heart sounds

K22463_C007.indd 197

Figure 7.2 Hepatojugular reflux sign. There is marked
distension of the jugular veins (right) when pressure is applied
to the cranial abdomen, compared with baseline (left).

and abnormalities. The normal heart sounds are S1, associated with closure of the atrioventricular (AV) valves,
and S2, associated with closure of semilunar valves. S1 is
normally longer and louder than S2. A split S1 may be
auscultated and indicates asynchronous closure of the
AV valves. S2 is shorter and higher pitched than S1, and
is loudest over the pulmonic and aortic areas. Splitting of
S2 indicates asynchronous closure of the aortic and pulmonic valves (Table 7.4).
Abnormal heart sounds in small animals include S3,
due to rapid ventricular filling, and S4, due to atrial contraction into overly distended or noncompliant ventricle.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

198

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 7.3 Areas of auscultation in dogs.
Mitral area

Left hemithorax

5th intercostal space at
­costochondral junction

Aortic area

Left hemithorax

4th intercostal space at
­costochondral junction

Pulmonic
area

Left hemithorax

2nd to 4th intercostal
space at left sternal border

Tricuspid
area

Right
hemithorax

3rd to 5th intercostal
space near costochondral
junction

Table 7.4 Abnormal heart sounds and their causes.
Abnormal
heart sound
Split S1

Split S2

S3

Causes
Normal in some large breed dogs
Right bundle branch block
APCs
VPCs
Mitral valve/tricuspid valve stenosis
Normal during inspiration in some animals
Pulmonary hypertension
Right bundle branch block
VPCs
Pulmonic stenosis
Left bundle branch block
SAS
Severe hypertension
Aortic insufficiency
DCM
Decompensated AV valve disease
PDA with left ventricular dilation

S4

HCM
3rd degree AV block

Mid-systolic
click

Mitral valve prolapse

APC, atrial premature complex; VPC, ventricular
­premature complex; SAS, subaortic stenosis; DCM, dilated
­cardiomyopathy; AV, atrioventricular; PDA, patent ductus
arteriosus; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Both S3 and S4 are quiet, low pitched, and occur in
­diastole. An audible S3 is indicative of dilated ventricles
and S4 indicates a thickened or noncompliant ventricle
or atrial contraction against an already closed AV valve.
When S3 or S4 is audible it is called a gallop rhythm.
Systolic click is a transient sound that may mimic a

K22463_C007.indd 198

gallop rhythm. It is caused by the prolapse of the AV
valves, ­typically in the early stage of degenerative mitral
valve disease in dogs. Conversely, a gallop rhythm in dogs
usually results from a very enlarged left ventricle, and
therefore advanced cardiac disease.
Cardiac murmurs are abnormal sounds caused by
turbulent blood flow. Murmurs may be functional or
pathologic. Functional murmurs are further divided into
physiologic and innocent. Physiologic murmurs have a
known cause unrelated to primary cardiac d
­ isease, and are
associated with increased cardiac output or altered blood
viscosity. Innocent murmurs occur in young ­animals and
have no known cause or associated cardiac disease. They
should be no louder than a grade 3 and should disappear
­ urmurs are
by 5 months of age (Table 7.5). Pathologic m
caused by an underlying cardiac disease (Table 7.6).
Murmurs should be described by their timing, duration,
grade, and point of maximal intensity (PMI). Additional
information includes quality and pitch of the murmur.
The timing of the murmur is either systolic, diastolic,
continuous, or to-and-fro. Systolic murmurs are the most
Table 7.5 Causes of functional murmurs in dogs and cats.
Physiologic:
•• Anemia
•• Fever
•• Hypoproteinemia
•• Hypertension
•• Pregnancy
•• Hyperthyroidism
Innocent:
•• No known cause or underlying cardiac disease
Table 7.6 Causes (and location) of pathologic murmurs in dogs
and cats.
Systolic murmurs:
•• AV valve regurgitation (left or right apical)
•• Right ventricular outflow tract obstruction; pulmonic
­stenosis or dynamic right ventricular outflow tract
obstruction (right basilar)
•• Left ventricular outflow tract obstruction; ­subaortic
­stenosis or dynamic left ventricular outflow tract
­obstruction (left basilar)
•• Ventricular septal defect (right apical, sternal, left basilar)
•• Valvular endocarditis (left apical)
Diastolic murmurs:
•• Aortic insufficiency (left basilar)
•• Mitral valve stenosis (left apical)
•• Valvular endocarditis (left basilar)
Continuous murmurs:
•• Patent ductus arteriosus

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

7.3

common and can be further classified into: early, mid-, or
late systolic; holosystolic (murmur extends throughout
systole, but heart sounds remain audible); or pansystolic
(murmur extends through systole, but S2 is obscured).
Diastolic murmurs are often quiet and are much less
common. Continuous murmurs can be heard during all
phases of the cardiac cycle. To-and-fro murmurs occur
when there is a distinct systolic and diastolic murmur.
Murmurs are graded on a 1 to 6 scale (Table 7.7). Murmur
grade does not necessarily correlate with the severity of
the underlying disease.
The PMI is the location where the murmur is heard
loudest. If possible, it should be localized to a single valve
region. However, in small dogs and cats, the distinction of apical versus basilar is acceptable. Additionally,
the l­ocations of the radiation of the murmur should be
described.

R

P

PR interval
Q

ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY AND HOLTER
MONITORING
Definition
The electrocardiogram (ECG) records the electrical activity of the heart from electrodes positioned at the surface
of the body. A normal ECG displays three distinct events:
a P wave during atrial depolarization; followed by a ventricular complex, or QRS complex during ventricular
depolarization; and finally a T wave, which corresponds
to ventricular repolarization (Figure 7.3). The atrial repolarization is usually not detected. The duration and the
amplitude of the waves can be measured from the ECG.
Table 7.7 Murmur intensity grading system.
Murmur
grade

Description

1

Can only be heard after several minutes of
­listening in a silent room

2

Soft and only heard in a focal region of the
thorax

3

Heard throughout one side of the thorax, but
does not radiate to the opposite side; equal in
volume to normal heart sounds

4

Heard on both sides of the thorax; no precordial
thrill

5

Palpable precordial thrill; very loud murmur

6

Audible with the stethoscope slightly off the
thorax

K22463_C007.indd 199

199

T

Figure 7.3 P-QRS-T illustrating the sequence of activation
of the heart. Note that on this ECG there is no clearly defined
S wave.

The duration (or width) of a wave depends on the time it
takes for the electrical impulse to propagate within the
cardiac chambers. The amplitude, or height, of a wave
usually changes with the size of the cardiac chambers.
All measurements should be made in lead II. The amplitude of the waves can decrease when fluid (air or liquid),
fat, or a large mass interferes with the propagation of
the ­electrical signals to the surface of the body. The P-R
interval reflects the conduction time through the AV node
(Table 7.8).
Ambulatory electrocardiography devices, known as
Holter systems, allow clinicians to record a 24–72-hour
ECG recording while the animal has a normal activity
level in a familiar environment (Figure 7.4). Implantable
devices are now available to collect ECG data. These
devices are event recorders that can be manually triggered to save an ECG whenever clinical signs are observed
by the owner of a pet. They are indicated in animals that
only present with rare episodes of weakness or syncope.

Indications
The ECG is used to measure heart rate and evaluate cardiac rhythm. It is less reliable for gathering information
about structural cardiac changes, such as hypertrophy.
Therefore, it should be performed when an arrhythmia is
detected on physical examination and when the presenting complaint may be explained by an arrhythmia.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

200

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 7.8 ECG features of the normal dog and cat. (Adapted from Tilley LP (1992) Essentials of Canine and Feline Electrocardiography.
Interpretation and Management, 3rd edn. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia.) All measurements made in lead II.
Dog

Cat

Heart rate

70–160 bpm for adult dogs
60–140 bpm for giant breeds
Up to 180 bpm for toy breeds
Up to 220 bpm for puppies

Range 120–240 bpm
Mean 197 bpm

Rhythm

Normal sinus rhythm
Sinus arrhythmia
Wandering SA pacemaker

Normal sinus rhythm

P wave

Width: maximum 0.04 sec; 0 .05 sec in giant breeds
Height: maximum 0.4 mV

Width: maximum 0.04 sec
Height: maximum 0.2 mV

P-R interval

Width: 0.06–0.13 sec

Width: 0.05–0.09 sec

QRS complex

Width: maximum 0.05 sec in small breeds; 0 .06 sec in large breeds
Height of the R wave: maximum 2.5 mV in small breeds; 3 mV in
large breeds

Width: maximum 0.04 sec
Height of the R wave:
maximum 0.9mV

S-T segment

No depression: not more than 0.2 mV
No elevation: not more than 0.15 mV

No marked depression or elevation

T wave

Positive, negative, or biphasic
Not greater than one fourth amplitude of R wave

Positive, negative, or biphasic.
Most often positive
Maximum amplitude 0.3 mV

Q-T interval

Width: 0.15–0.25 sec at normal HR; varies with HR

Width 0.12–0.18 sec at normal HR;
varies with HR

Mean electrical axis

+40 to +100 degrees

0 to +160 degrees

7.4

arrhythmogenic right
(ARVC) in Boxers.

ventricular

cardiomyopathy

Method

Figure 7.4 Twenty-four-hour Holter recording in a dog.

The main indications for Holter recordings are
the detection of an arrhythmia as the cause for
­unexplained s­ yncope, the quantification of arrhythmias,
and ­monitoring of the response to antiarrhythmic therapies. This technique is also used to screen predisposed
breeds for signs of specific cardiac diseases, in particular

K22463_C007.indd 200

Recording artifacts, caused by poor contact between the
skin and the electrodes, breathing, shivering, or ­electrical
interference, frequently interfere with the interpretation of ECG recordings. It is therefore critical to dedicate
enough time and personnel to obtain a good quality ECG.
First, the animal should be restrained in right lateral
­recumbency. Although ECGs can be recorded in a standing
­position or in sternal recumbency in patients in respiratory distress or that are uncooperative, it may change the
appearance of the ECG tracing. The electrodes should be
secured at the level of the elbows and knees, or as distal
as possible on the four limbs to reduce artifacts ­secondary
to the motion of the chest during breathing (Figure 7.5).
Alcohol or a specifically formulated conducting gel is
applied to improve contact between the skin and the
­electrodes. The recording sensitivity is usually selected at
10 mm/mV, but should be increased or decreased according to the amplitude of the waves on the ECG. A recording
speed of 50 mm/sec is usually preferred. Some filters can
be applied to the recording to reduce artifacts.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

7.5

Figure 7.5 Electrode placement for good quality ECG
recording.

The placement of four electrodes on the surface of the
body allows recording of six leads: I, II, III, aVR, aVL, and
aVF. These six leads display simultaneously the ECG from
six different directions. If a wave is mostly above the baseline, it indicates that the electrical signal travels towards
the recording electrode. The wave is below the baseline if
the signal moves away from the recording electrode.

201

part of the specialized conduction system requiring the
electrical depolarization to travel slowly between cardiomyocytes. Left and right ventricular hypertrophy and
intraventricular conduction disturbances can change
the amplitude, duration, and/or the direction of the QRS
complexes during sinus rhythm. The direction of the
QRS complexes is determined by c­ alculation of the mean
electrical axis. In dogs, the QRS complex in lead I should
always be positive (larger amplitude R wave), indicating
that the mean electrical axis of the QRS complexes is oriented towards the left. A negative QRS complex (larger
amplitude S wave) in lead I indicates a right axis shift. In
cats, the QRS complex in lead aVF should always be positive, indicating that the mean e­ lectrical axis is oriented
caudally. When the QRS complex is negative in lead aVF
and positive in lead I, it indicates a left axis shift. When it
is negative in lead aVF and lead I, it indicates a right axis
shift (Figures 7.7–7.12).
SUPRAVENTRICULAR

7.6
Sinus node
AV node

Tracing interpretation
First, the heart rate (in bpm) should be calculated manually, because the number displayed by some electronic
ECG systems may be inaccurate. Usually, an average
heart rate calculated over a few seconds is sufficient. For
example, the number of QRS complexes can be calculated
during 3 seconds (which corresponds to 15 cm, or the
length of a regular pen, when the recording speed is set
at 50 mm/s), and the number obtained is multiplied by
20 to obtain the heart rate per minute. Second, the waves
should be identified on the tracing, and their duration
and amplitude measured (Table 7.8). The P waves can be
absent in some arrhythmias but the T waves are always
present following QRS complexes. Next, the heart rhythm
is analyzed in order to evaluate if it is regular or irregular, and if the rhythm is sinus (each P-wave related to
each QRS complex with a constant P-R interval) or not.
Analysis of the morphology of the QRS complexes provides information on the origin (e.g. supraventricular
or ventricular) of the rhythm. QRS complexes of normal duration indicate that the electrical impulse travels
through the s­pecialized conduction system within the
ventricle and, therefore, that the rhythm originated in
the atrium or the AV node. Conversely, wide QRS complexes usually indicate that the electrical impulses originate within the ventricles (Figure 7.6). Alternatively, it
may indicate a bundle branch block, which is a lesion of

K22463_C007.indd 201

Bundle branch

VENTRICULAR

Figure 7.6 QRS complex morphology based on the origin of
the electrical impulse. Electrical impulses originating at or
above the atrioventricular node, that is the supraventricular
area, conduct through the specialized conduction system (in
yellow). Electrical impulses originating in the ventricles travel
within nonspecialized tissue at a lower speed. Supraventricular
QRS complexes are narrow; ventricular QRS complexes are wide.
I

7.7

II
III

Figure 7.7 ECG showing respiratory sinus arrhythmia with
wandering pacemaker (arrows) in a dog. Both result from
variation of vagal tone with breathing in a healthy dog.
Wandering pacemaker is a variation in the amplitude of the
P waves with breathing caused by a shift of the origin of
the electrical impulses within the sinus node. (Amplitude
10 mm/mV, speed 50 mm/sec)

23/04/16 1:06 pm

202

Diseases of specific organ systems

7.8

I

7.10

II

II

Figure 7.8 ECG showing sinus rhythm with a tall and wide
P wave suggesting atrial enlargement (most likely left atrium).
(Amplitude 10 mm/mV, speed 50 mm/sec)
I

Figure 7.10 ECG showing sinus rhythm with positive and
wide QRS in lead II, consistent with a left bundle branch block.
(Amplitude 10 mm/mV, speed 50 mm/sec)

7.9

II

III

7.11

P

II

P’

Figure 7.11 ECG showing sinus rhythm with one atrial
premature contraction (APC) (arrow). The morphology of the
QRS complex of APCs is similar to the QRS of sinus beats, as the
electrical impulse uses the specialized conduction pathways
in the ventricles. A P wave is visible just after the T wave, and
its morphology slightly differs from the P wave of sinus beats.
(Amplitude 10 mm/mV, speed 50 mm/sec)

a VR

7.12

a VL

a VF

Figure 7.9 ECG showing sinus rhythm with a right-axis shift
(negative QRS in lead I, II, III, and aVF) and wide QRS complexes,
consistent with a right bundle branch block. (Amplitude
10 mm/mV, speed 50 mm/sec)

ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
Indications
Echocardiography is a noninvasive method of evaluating
cardiac anatomy and function. Thoracic radiography and

K22463_C007.indd 202

I

II

Figure 7.12 ECG showing sinus rhythm with one ventricular
premature contraction (VPC) (arrow). The morphology of the
QRS is ‘wide and bizarre’ and very different from the QRS
complexes of sinus beats. It indicates the slow conduction of
the electrical impulse in the ventricles.

echocardiography are complementary in the evaluation
of an animal with cardiac disease: presence or absence of
CHF and size of the pulmonary vessels can only be evaluated from chest radiographs; information about chamber
size, valve motion, and ventricular function can, however,

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

203

Imaging techniques
Echocardiographic windows

only be obtained via echocardiography. A comprehensive
echocardiographic examination requires the use of various modalities including 2-dimensional, M-mode, and
Doppler echocardiography (Figure 7.13).
At the end of an echocardiogram, the clinician should
have identified the primary lesion and its likely cause,
the presence of coexisting abnormalities, the size and
function of all four cardiac chambers, and the severity
of the lesion (mild, moderate, severe). Finally, the initial echocardiographic examination provides baseline
information for assessing the progression of the disease
and monitoring the response to treatment of individual
patients on follow-up examinations.

Transthoracic images of the heart can be obtained where
lung tissue is not interposed between the heart and the
chest wall. A parasternal window is present on the right
side of the thorax between the sternal border and the
costochondral junction from the 3rd to the 6th intercostal spaces. On the left side it is close to the sternal border
between the 5th and 7th intercostal spaces (caudal or apical views) and between the sternum and the costochondral junction at the 3rd or 4th intercostal space (cranial
views) (Figure 7.14).

Animal positioning
Echocardiograms are usually obtained with the patient
in lateral recumbency on a ‘cutout’ table that allows
transducer manipulation from beneath the animal. One
or two assistants help restrain the patient in left and
right lateral recumbency. ECG cables should be attached
to the animal’s limbs and an ECG tracing should be continuously displayed on the monitor. Sedation is usually
not needed. Dogs and cats can also be examined in standing position.

7.13

Transducer selection
Transducers with a small contact surface are ­preferred.
The optimal transducer frequency is therefore ­determined
by the size of the animal: 8–10 MHz for cats and small

Figure 7.13 Echocardiographic modalities: two-dimensional (A),
M-mode (B), color Doppler (C), spectral Doppler (D).
A

C
RV
RA

RA

Pulm. V

LV

LV
LA

LA

RV
Ao
LAu

PM

B

D

F
RV

RV
LV

7.14

E

RV

LV

Ao

MV

RA
Ao

RV
PA

LAu

Figure 7.14 Standard two-dimensional echocardiographic views. (A) Right parasternal long-axis four-chamber view allows
visualization of all four cardiac chambers. (B) Right parasternal long-axis outflow view. (C) Right parasternal short-axis view at the
level of the left ventricular papillary muscles. This view is used to measure wall thicknesses and the diameter of the left ventricle
in diastole and systole. (D) Right parasternal short-axis view at the level of the mitral valve; also called ‘fish-mouth’ view. (E) Right
parasternal short-axis view at the left atrium/aorta level. This view is used to measure the diameter of the left atrium. (F) Right
parasternal short axis view at the pulmonary artery level. The pulmonic valve and the diameter of the pulmonary artery and its main
branches can be evaluated from this view.

K22463_C007.indd 203

23/04/16 1:06 pm

204

Diseases of specific organ systems

breed dogs, 5–8 MHz for medium size dogs, and 2–5 MHz
for large breed dogs.

Echocardiographic evaluation of cardiac chamber
size and function
Every clinician should be able to evaluate left atrial size,
left ventricular size and function, and the size of the
right-sided cardiac chambers (Box 7.1).

Left ventricle
The left ventricle is the largest cardiac chamber. It is conical in shape and forms the apex of the heart. The cavity of the left ventricle is divided into an inflow and an
ouflow region. The interventricular septum delimits the
outflow tract medially, and the septal leaflet of the mitral
valve forms an intermittent lateral boundary at the base
of the heart. There is no anatomic partition of the outflow
tract in the apical and mid-ventricular regions. The outflow tract is best imaged from the right parasternal longaxis outflow view and the left apical five-chamber plane.
The interventricular septum separates the left ventricle
from the right ventricle, and is best imaged from a right
parasternal long-axis view. It is thick (thickness similar
to the left ventricular free wall) and muscular for most of
its length, but has a thin membranous part at the origin
of the aorta.
Standard measurements include the interventricular septum thickness, the left ventricular internal diameter, and the left ventricular posterior wall thickness in
end-diastole and end-systole. End-diastole is measured
­
at the onset of the QRS complex on ECG, which also corresponds to the frame following mitral valve closure or
the frame in which the left ventricular internal diameter
is maximum. End-systole occurs at the end of the T wave.

In the absence of an ECG, systole coincides with the frame
preceding mitral valve opening or the frame in which
the left ventricular internal diameter is the smallest.
Measurements are made on the right parasternal shortaxis view at the chordae tendineae level, either directly
with calipers on a two-dimensional still frame or on an
M-mode display (Figure 7.15).
Qualitative assessment of left ventricular function
should be complemented with quantitative measurements. In dogs and cats, left ventricular systolic function
is usually determined by calculating the shortening fraction (FS) from linear measurements of the left ventricular
internal diameter in end-diastole (LVIDd) and end-systole
(LVIDs). FS (expressed as a percentage) is calculated from
the formula:
FS = (LVIDd – LVIDs)/LVIDd × 100
7.15

RV
IVS

Box 7.1 Qualitative echocardiographic evaluation of
cardiac structure and function in the dog.
•• Left and right atrium are approximately the same size
•• The diameter of the left atrium is less than 1.5 times the
diameter of the aortic valve annulus
•• The right ventricular internal diameter is approximately
one-third of the left ventricular internal diameter
•• The thickness of the right ventricular wall is approximately one-third of the thickness of the left ventricular
free wall
•• The interventricular septum is approximately the same
thickness as the left ventricular free wall
•• The left ventricular internal diameter should decrease
by 30–40 % in systole compared with diastole (fractional
shortening = 30–40%)
•• The diameter of the main pulmonary artery is the same
as the aortic root diameter

K22463_C007.indd 204

LVd

LVs

FW

Figure 7.15 M-mode view of the left ventricle at the chordae
tendineae level. The M-mode cursor is placed perpendicular to
the interventricular septum and bisects the left ventricular free
wall between the two papillary muscles. LVd, left ventricular
internal diameter in diastole; LVs, left ventricular internal
diameter in systole; RV, right ventricle; IVS, interventricular
septum; FW, left ventricular free wall.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

For example, a FS equal to 30% indicates that the left
ventricular internal diameter is 30% smaller in systole
than it is in diastole. In the authors’ echocardiography
laboratory, normal dogs have an FS of 30–45%. However,
it seems that FS can be as low as 22–25% in normal large
breed dogs. FS is around 40% in cats.

7.16

Ao
LA

Right ventricle
The right ventricle has a complex geometry, described
as crescent shaped or pyramid shaped. This, in addition
to its smaller size and thinner walls, makes the echocardiographic assessment of the right ventricle difficult.
Qualitatively, the right ventricular internal diameter
is approximately one-third of the left ventricle, and the
right ventricular free wall is equal to one-third or onehalf of the thickness of the left ventricular free wall.
The right ventricle chamber is divided into an inflow
and an outflow region by a ridge of muscular tissue
known as crista supraventricularis. Both regions cannot
be fully examined on the same echocardiographic view.
The inflow region is directly beneath the tricuspid valve.
It is best assessed from the right parasternal long-axis
four-chamber view and the left apical four-chamber view.
The outflow region extends upward and to the left. It is
best imaged from the right parasternal short-axis view at
the aorta level and the left cranial short-axis views. Small
papillary muscles originate from the apical portion of the
interventricular septum.

Left atrium
The left atrium is an oval-shaped chamber positioned
caudal to the aorta and above the left ventricle. It is
divided into the body of the atrium and the auricle.
The auricle is heavily trabeculated. It is best imaged from
a right parasternal short-axis view at the aortic valve
level. Contraction of the left atrium delivers 15–30% of
left ventricular filling. The left atrium receives blood
from 5–8 (usually 7) pulmonary veins, which enter the
craniodorsal and caudodorsal part of the chamber. They
are usually not clearly visible on the echocardiogram, but
pulmonary venous inflow can be identified and studied
by pulsed-wave Doppler. The interatrial septum separates
the left atrium and the right atrium. The flap of the foramen ovale may be seen from a right parasternal long-axis
four-chamber view on the left atrial side in animals with
a patent foramen ovale.
Linear measurements of the left atrium are used to calculate the left atrium to aortic ratio (LA/Ao). LA/Ao ratio
is independent of body weight. In healthy dogs and cats,
the LA/Ao ratio is between 1.3 and 1.5 (Figure 7.16). It is
usually not >1.6.

K22463_C007.indd 205

205

Figure 7.16 Measurement of the left atrium and aortic valve
annulus from a two-dimensional right parasternal short-axis
view. The LA/Ao ratio should be less than 1.5 in healthy animals.
LA, left atrium; Ao: aorta.

Right atrium
The right atrium is an ovoid structure divided into a main
chamber and the right auricle. The right auricle is difficult
to image with transthoracic echocardiography. In clinical
practice, qualitative assessment of the right atrium is made
by comparing its size with the left atrium. In healthy animals, left and right atrium are of comparable size.

Doppler echocardiography
Doppler echocardiography provides information on blood
flow direction and velocity. Color-flow Doppler is used to
‘map’ blood flow on a two-dimensional view of the heart.
Blood flow velocity across valves, septal defects, and at
the level of extracardiac vascular shunts is measured
via pulsed-wave and continuous-wave Doppler. Pressure
­gradients between cardiac chambers can be calculated
from blood flow velocity using the simplified Bernoulli
equation (pressure gradient = 4 × peak velocity2), which
makes Doppler echocardiography a practical and noninvasive technique for estimating intracardiac chamber
pressures (Figure 7.17).

CARDIAC BIOMARKERS
Cardiac biomarkers are biological molecules found in the
blood that inform about the presence of cardiac disease.

Natriuretic peptide
Natriuretic peptides are released by the atria and ventricles in response to stretch caused by volume or pressure
overload. A nonbiologically active fragment of the B-type
natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) has been extensively
studied. It has been suggested that NT-proBNP might

23/04/16 1:06 pm

206

Diseases of specific organ systems

7.17
Right ventricle
PRV

Right atrium
PRV

Vmax

Tricuspid
regurgitation

HEART FAILURE
ΔR = PRV – PRA = 4 × Vmax2
PRV = 4 × Vmax2 + PRA (mmHg)

Add 5 if RA normal size
Add 10 if enlarged RA, no congestive heart failure
Add 15 if enlarged RA, no congestive heart failure

Figure 7.17 Use of Doppler echocardiography to estimate right
ventricular pressure. In the presence of tricuspid regurgitation,
the peak velocity of blood flow across the tricuspid valve can
be obtained by spectral Doppler and depends on the pressure
gradient between the right ventricle and the right atrium. The
pressure in the right atrium can be approximated from its size
and the presence or absence of heart failure. For example,
if V = 5 m/s, ΔP = 4 × 52 = 100 mmHg; if the right atrium
is normal size, right ventricular pressure is approximately
100 + 5 = 105 mmHg, indicating pulmonary hypertension. PRV,
right ventricular pressure in systole; PRA, right atrial pressure;
Vmax, peak velocity.

be useful in identifying a cardiac cause for dyspnea,
­detecting occult cardiac disease (dilated cardiomyopathy
[DCM], hypertrophic cardiomyopathy [HCM]), and predicting mortality in dogs with heart disease. However, studies
have shown that NT-proBNP has limited value as a standalone test, but can be used to orientate a decision to pursue
more advanced tests (chest radiographs, echocardiogram,
Holter recording). Cut-off values vary between commercially available assays. Typically, NT-proBNP level is elevated in dogs with heart failure and increases as the heart
enlarges. In cats with HCM, NT-proBNP concentration is
increased. High NT-proBNP levels in a cat with pleural
effusion strongly suggest a cardiac cause for the effusion. However, increased NT-proBNP concentration is also
detected with hyperthyroidism, systemic hypertension
and PH, and renal failure, because it is renally excreted.

Cardiac troponin I
Cardiac troponin I (cTnI) is one of the proteins involved
in contraction of cardiomyocytes. Disruption of the
membrane of some cardiomyocytes leads to leakage of
cTnI into the circulation. Moderate to large elevations in
cTnI concentration can be detected with current assays.
Moderate elevations (approximately 10-fold increase

K22463_C007.indd 206

compared with healthy animals) are common in the
presence of CHF, third-degree AV block or subaortic stenosis (SAS). Large elevations (approximately 50–200-fold
increase compared with healthy animals) are thought to
indicate myocarditis if this diagnosis is supported by the
history and clinical presentation. Important elevations of
cTnI concentration also occur with myocardial infarction,
but it is rare in dogs and cats.

Definition/overview
Heart failure occurs when there is inadequate delivery of
oxygen to the tissues of the body from impaired cardiac
function and maldistribution of blood despite adequate
venous return to the heart. CHF occurs with impaired cardiac function and a concurrent increase in venous and
capillary pressures, which results in fluid accumulation
in tissues and organs of the body.

Pathophysiology
Biomechanical, mechanical, and functional alterations
occur in the failing heart. Biochemical changes are dominated by a decrease in the rate of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis. Cardiac contraction depends on
the interaction between actin and myosin proteins, particularly the heavy meromyosin heads that ­repeatedly
bind to actin. Decreased ATP hydrolysis leads to less
interaction of heavy meromyosin heads with actin. The
primary mechanical derangement in the failing heart is
a reduction of the maximal velocity at which the heavy
meromyosin heads can cycle, resulting in a decrease in
myocardial fiber shortening. Overall, this is a decrease
in contractility or pump function that is observed with
heart failure. In a healthy heart, increased ventricular
filling (or preload) results in a more forceful contraction.
The failing heart, however, generates a lower force of
contraction (systolic function) than expected despite an
increased preload present prior to contraction. Hence, for
any given preload, the systolic function is less than anticipated when compared with normal.
A small decrease in cardiac output is detected by
high-pressure baroreceptors in the aorta and triggers
an activation of the adrenergic system. Alpha and betaadrenergic stimulation results in an increase in heart rate
and cardiac contractility, as well as peripheral vasoconstriction. In addition to the stimulation of the sympathetic
nervous system, renin is released from the kidneys secondary to decreased renal blood flow. Angiotensinogen is
cleaved via renin to angiotensin I in the liver; angiotensin
I is then cleaved by the angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) to angiotensin II in the vasculature. Angiotensin
II activation results in: vasoconstriction; antidiuretic

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

hormone (ADH) release from the posterior pituitary
gland, which further constricts small arteries, arterioles,
and veins and decreases urine production; and aldosterone release from the adrenal medulla, which results in
sodium and water retention in the distal collecting duct.
Moreover, over time angiotensin II stimulates myocardial hypertrophy, fibrosis, and vascular smooth muscle
growth, leading to arteriolar narrowing (Figure 7.18).
Pulmonary edema from left-sided CHF occurs typically
when left atrial pressure is above 18–22 mmHg (normally
7 mmHg) and a large volume of serum begins to weep
from the pulmonary capillaries into the lung interstitium and alveolar space at a rate above the capacity of
the p
­ ulmonary lymphatics to drain it in accordance with
the principles of Starling’s Law.

Clinical presentation
Animals with left-sided CHF (pulmonary edema) typically present with tachypnea and dyspnea depending
on the chronicity and amount of edema accumulation.
Thoracic auscultation most commonly reveals tachycardia; however, some cats and, rarely, dogs are bradycardic. Cardiac auscultation may also reveal the presence
of heart murmurs, gallop sounds, and arrhythmias.

207

Respiratory sounds are usually increased and crackles
may or may not be present. Tachycardia with increased
respiratory rate and effort in a dog is a more reliable indicator of pulmonary edema than the presence of crackles
alone. Cough may be present but can commonly occur
with airway disease in small breed dogs with concurrent
mitral valve degeneration and tracheal collapse. Cough
in a large breed dog is a more reliable indicator of pulmonary edema. Syncope may also be reported in dogs
with mild pulmonary edema. More severe clinical signs
include coughing up pink-tinged sputum; these animals
require immediate emergency attention and exceptional
measures such as intubation and mechanical ventilation
(Figure 7.19).
Left-sided CHF in cats may differ from dogs in terms
of clinical signs and fluid accumulation. Cats more
­frequently develop bradycardia, hypotension, and hypothermia. Additionally, left-sided CHF can also lead to
pleural effusion and/or small amounts of pericardial
­effusion. Dual venous drainage of the pleural surfaces
in cats can allow pleural effusion with left- and/or rightsided CHF. It is hypothesized that in cats with left-sided
CHF, the v
­ isceral lung drainage via the pulmonary veins
is impaired and pleural effusion results. Conversely,

Blood pressure

7.18

1
2

3, 10

HR
M

Vasoconstriction

hy
op
r tr
pe
hy
ht
al
rig res
di
ed u
ar
as ess
cre pr
In rial
at

c
yo

sin

5

7
Angiotensin II
ACE
Angiotensin I

8
ADH

II

Thirst

en
ot

gi
An

Angiotensinogen
Renin

9

Norepinephine

Renin

4
12
Na reabsorption

6
Aldosterone
11

Figure 7.18 Sequence of compensatory mechanisms during heart failure. Numbers indicate the sequence of events. Vascular
underfilling (1) detected by the arterial baroreceptors activates the sympathetic nervous system (2), resulting in vasoconstriction
and tachycardia (3), and renin release (4). Activation of the renin angiotensin system (6) contributes to activation of the sympathetic
system (9) and vasoconstriction (10). Release of ADH (8) causes thirst and aldosterone (11) is responsible for sodium and water
retention (12).

K22463_C007.indd 207

23/04/16 1:06 pm

208

Diseases of specific organ systems

7.19

most common presentation for right-sided CHF, albeit
uncommon.

Differential diagnosis
Conditions that mimic left-sided CHF include ­pulmonary
thromboembolism (PTE), noncardiogenic pulmonary
edema (airway obstruction, strangulation, ­near-drowning,
neurogenic), hemorrhage, neoplasia, systemic inflammatory response syndrome, and acute respiratory distress
syndrome. Differential diagnoses for ascites and pleural
effusion should include right-sided CHF, hypoalbuminemia, hepatic disease, vasculitis, hemorrhage, infection,
and neoplasia.

Diagnosis

Figure 7.19 Dog with severe pulmonary edema coughing up
pink, blood-tinged sputum.

pleural effusion in cats with right-sided CHF would
result from impaired drainage of the parietal lung via
the s­ ystemic veins.
Right-sided CHF in dogs typically causes ascites.
Pleural effusion, pericardial effusion, and subcutaneous edema can also be seen, but tend to occur at a later
stage of the disease than ascites. Pleural effusion alone
is unusual but can be seen with tricuspid valve dysplasia (TVD)/stenosis, pericardial disease, cranial caval
obstruction (functional or congenital), and supraventricular tachyarrhythmias. Signs of right-sided CHF include
abdominal distension, jugular pulsation and distension,
positive hepatojugular reflex, and possibly swollen subcutaneous tissue. Limb edema is most commonly seen
with advanced disease and focal facial and neck s­ welling
may suggest cranial caval obstruction or pericardial
disease. Auscultation most commonly reveals tachycardia. Murmurs, gallop sounds, split S2 heart sounds, and
arrhythmias may also be noted. Lung sounds and heart
sounds may be decreased in the presence of a large
­volume of pleural effusion.
In cats, right-sided CHF is rare, and ascites alone in a
cat is usually not cardiac-related. Pleural effusion is the

K22463_C007.indd 208

Diagnosis of left-sided CHF can be made readily from
thoracic radiographs (see Chapter 6: Approach to thoracic
radiographs). Pulmonary edema can be noted in canine
patients, and pulmonary edema and/or pleural effusion
may be noted in cats. In dogs, pulmonary infiltrates are
most commonly seen in the caudodorsal lung lobes, and
typically in the right caudal lung lobe first. Left-sided
cardiomegaly will often be present, as well as pulmonary
venous distension unless the patient is already being
administered furosemide (Figure 7.20). In cats, pulmonary edema has a more diffuse distribution, and cardiomegaly may be more difficult to recognize than in dogs.
Ultrasonography is a useful tool to detect pleural effusion.
Diagnosis of right-sided CHF can be made from physical examination, radiographs, and/or ultrasound.
Thoracic radiographs may show pleural effusion and
suggest ascites as a loss of detail in the cranial abdomen.
Abdominal ultrasound shows abdominal effusion and
hepatic venous congestion.

Management
Treatment recommendations are made according to a
classification of the consecutive stages of heart failure
(Table 7.9). Drugs indicated for the treatment of heart
failure include diuretics, vasodilators, positive inotropes,
and modulators of the autonomic tone (Table 7.10).
There is no consensus on the initiation of medical therapy before the onset of CHF. The initiation of ACE inhibitors in dogs with severe cardiac disease but no evidence
of decompensation (late stage B2) is controversial. Dogs
with stage B1 and B2 heart failure should be rechecked
every 6–12 months to monitor the progression of the disease and educate the pet owner to recognize the signs
of CHF. Whenever the risk of CHF is high, the pet owner
should monitor the animal’s resting respiratory rate on a
daily basis. A resting respiratory rate above 40 bpm is a
sensitive indicator of CHF and should trigger a visit to the
veterinary clinic.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

7.20

Figure 7.20 Radiograph from a dog with cardiogenic
pulmonary edema. Note that the alveolar pattern is
predominantly right sided (arrow).

209

Table 7.10 Drugs commonly used in treatment of congestive
heart failure.
Diuretics

Furosemide 0.5–4 mg/kg PO, IM or IV q8–12h;
usually 0.3–0.5 mg/kg/h CRI (up to 1 mg/kg/h
in refractory cases)
Spironolactone 0.5–2 mg/kg PO q12–24h
Hydrochlorothiazide 0.5–1 mg/kg PO q12–24h
Torsemide – total daily furosemide dose
divided by 10 and split into PO q12h dosing

ACE
inhibitors

Benazepril 0.25–0.5 mg/kg PO q24h
Enalapril 0.25–0.5 mg/kg PO q12–24h

Positive
inotropes

Pimobendan 0.2–0.4 mg/kg PO q12h
Digoxin 0.005 mg/kg PO q12h
Dobutamine 3–10 µg/kg/min IV CRI

Calcium
c­ hannel
blockers

Amlodipine 0.01–0.1 mg/kg PO q24h
Diltiazem 0.5–2 mg/kg PO q8–12h
Diltiazem extended release 2–3 mg/kg
PO q12h

Betaadrenergic
receptor
blockers

Atenolol 0.5–2 mg/kg PO q12–24h
Propranolol (beta 1 & 2) 0.25–2 mg/kg PO q8h

Vasodilators

Nitroprusside 2–5 µg/kg/min CRI
Hydralazine 0.5–3 mg/kg PO q12h

Nitrates

Nitroglycerin 0.5 inch/5 kg topically q8h
Isosorbide dinitrate 0.2–2 mg/kg PO q12h

PDE-5
inhibitor

Sildenafil 1–3 mg/kg PO q8–12h

*All doses are for canines unless otherwise indicated. PDE-5,
phosphodiesterase-5.

Table 7.9 Classification of heart failure stages (based on ACVIM consensus statement).
Stage
of heart
failure

Description

A

Animals at high risk for developing heart disease but currently have no identifiable structural disorder of the heart

B

Animals with structural heart disease (e.g. the typical murmur of mitral valve regurgitation is present), but have never
developed clinical signs caused by heart failure:
•• Stage B1: Asymptomatic animals that have no radiographic or echocardiographic evidence of cardiac remodeling
in response to CVHD
•• Stage B2: Asymptomatic animals that have hemodynamically significant valve ­regurgitation, as evidenced by
radiographic or echocardiographic findings of left-sided heart enlargement

C

Animals with past or current clinical signs of heart failure associated with structural heart disease. May or may not
require hospitalization and aggressive anticongestive therapy

D

Animals with end-stage disease with clinical signs of heart failure caused by CVHD that are refractory to ‘standard
therapy’. Such patients require advanced or specialized treatment strategies in order to remain clinically c­ omfortable
with their disease. As with stage C, some animals in stage D will require acute, ­hospital-based ­therapy and others can
be managed as outpatients

CVHD, chronic valvular heart disease.

K22463_C007.indd 209

23/04/16 1:06 pm

210

Diseases of specific organ systems

Treatment of left-sided CHF in dogs always involves
administration of furosemide. IV, SC, or IM furosemide
and oxygen therapy should be considered in patients
with moderate to severe pulmonary edema and clinical
signs. IV furosemide is beneficial in these patients to rapidly clear edema and cause inherent release of prostaglandins, which increase renal blood flow. Administration
of furosemide as a constant rate infusion (CRI) is a good
alternative to repeated boluses every few hours. However,
a bolus of furosemide should always be given when the
CRI is started. In hospitalized patients, IV dobutamine
administration for positive inotropic support via direct
beta-adrenergic stimulation can be considered, especially in patients with DCM or advanced mitral valve
disease. Pimobendan is frequently administered during
hospitalization as part of the management of acute
heart failure. Afterload reduction with IV nitroprusside
through direct vasodilatory properties can be considered, especially in cases of severe mitral valve degeneration that are refractory to standard diuretic therapy.
Mild edema may be treated on an outpatient basis with
possible single dose administration of furosemide (IV, SC,
or IM) and continued therapy at home with oral furosemide. An ACE inhibitor should always be instituted for
the long-term management of all cardiac patients with
left-sided CHF as long as renal values and clinical signs
related to renal disease are reasonable and the patient
is eating well at home. ACE inhibitors are imperative for
blunting the neurohormonal activation of the renin–
angiotensin–aldosterone system (RAAS) system, which
is stimulated by the continuous administration of furosemide. Administration of pimobendan has become part
of the standard treatment protocol in all canine patients
with left-sided CHF. Further RAAS blockade can be considered with spironolactone administration, an aldosterone blocker and weak potassium sparing diuretic.
Arrhythmias that are present may also require treatment. Chronic refractory left-sided CHF can be managed
by ­multi-nephron blockade with additional diuretics that
work at different levels of the kidney ­(spironolactone,
hydrochlorothiazide). Hydrochlorothiazide must be used
very cautiously in patients with concurrent kidney disease, low sodium, and refractory CHF where ADH levels
are likely high, as this diuretic will interfere with the ability of the patient to dilute urine and excrete s­ olute free
water. Torsemide, a diuretic 10 times more potent than
furosemide, can be used to replace furosemide in chronic
cases. Finally, sildenafil administration for treatment of
severe PH can be considered, and for its possible effect of
­phosphodiesterase-5 inhibition in improving myocardial
function in the ventricles.

K22463_C007.indd 210

Treatment of right-sided CHF in canine patients is
similar to that for left-sided CHF. Typically, treatment
is not as urgent, but initiation of injectable furosemide
may be beneficial in cases with ascites where abdominal
organs surrounded by fluid may not readily absorb oral
furosemide. Body cavity fluid removal is as ­imperative
as furosemide administration, and as much fluid as possible should be removed from the abdominal and/or
pleural spaces (Figure 7.21). Oral administration of the
medications discussed above is also recommended for
­
right-sided CHF, with an emphasis on diagnosing and
treating PH. Administering spironolactone is recommended by some, as normal aldosterone breakdown by
the liver may be inhibited with a congested liver and rightsided CHF. Additionally, atrial tachyarrhythmias should
also be investigated and treated, as loss of atrial contraction may worsen right-sided CHF more than left-sided
CHF. Furosemide doses may also be more conservative in
cases of severe PH where dramatic preload reduction may
result in poor forward flow and systemic hypotension.
Treatment of cats with CHF will vary from dogs in five
major ways: (1) furosemide dosage will be lower and more
conservative; (2) efforts should be made to correct hypothermia and hypotension; (3) pimobendan is not indicated
unless echocardiographic evidence of ­systolic dysfunction is noted; (4) hypokalemia is a common side-effect of
furosemide therapy, therefore ­potassium concentration
should be monitored ­frequently and oral ­supplementation
initiated before signs of h
­ ypokalemia occur; (5) diuretics
other than furosemide and s­ pironolactone must be used
with extreme caution.
PH, cough from bronchi compression by an enlarged
heart, and syncope are also complications of heart failure
that may require specific therapies (Table 7.11).

Prognosis
The average survival time for a patient with CHF is
approximately 1–2 years with aggressive medical management. Dogs with right-heart failure and recurrent
7.21

Figure 7.21 Abdominocentesis in a dog using a 16-gauge
catheter. It is important to remove as much fluid as possible.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

Table 7.11 Treatment of clinical signs of heart failure in the
absence of congestive heart failure.
Clinical sign

Treatment

Syncope

Rule out CHF with radiographs. Start
ACE inhibitor or increase current dose of
furosemide or ACE inhibitor to alter loading
of the heart

Pulmonary
hypertension

Sildenafil 1–3 mg/kg PO q8–12h

Cough

Hydrocodone 0.25 mg/kg PO q6–12h
Butorphanol 0.2–0.4 mg/kg PO q6–12h

211

Although many CHDs have breed predispositions and
some have been shown to be heritable traits, not all CHDs
are inherited (Table 7.12). CHDs are often diagnosed based
on auscultation of a significant or unusual murmur in a
young patient, leading to further cardiac work up. Swift
detection may allow for treatment at an earlier stage of
disease, improving patient prognosis and quality of life.

SUBAORTIC STENOSIS
Definition/overview

ascites quickly develop cardiac cachexia, which significantly impairs their quality of life.

CONGENITAL HEART DISEASES
Congenital heart diseases (CHDs) are morphologic abnormalities of the heart and great vessels present at birth.
CHDs are uncommon in dogs and rare in cats. The most
common CHDs in the dog are SAS, PS, and PDA. The most
common CHDs in the cat are atrial septal defects (ASDs) or
ventricular septal defects (VSDs) and valvular dysplasias.

Aortic stenosis results from a narrowed left ventricular
outflow tract in the region of the aortic valve, which can
occur at a subvalvular, valvular, or supravalvular level. In
dogs, the most common manifestation is SAS.

Etiology
A genetic mutation responsible for SAS has been ­identified
in Newfoundlands.

Pathophysiology
Stenosis occurs from anomalous development of a fibrous
band or ring of tissue at the subvalvular level, which interferes with blood flow. The induced pressure ­overload on
the left ventricle causes left ventricular concentric

Table 7.12 Breed predisposition for congenital heart diseases.
Congenital defect

Breed predisposition

Known heritable mutation

Subaortic stenosis

Newfoundland, Rottweiler, Golden Retriever, Boxer, Great
Dane, German Short-haired Pointer, German Shepherd Dog,
Bouvier des Flandres, English Bulldog, Samoyed, Bull Terrier

Newfoundland

Pulmonic stenosis

English Bulldog, West Highland White Terrier, Beagle, Mastiff,
Samoyed, Miniature Schnauzer, American Cocker Spaniel,
Keeshond, Boxer, Chihuahua, Airedale Terrier

Beagle

Tricuspid valve dysplasia

Labrador Retriever, Golden Retriever, German Shepherd Dog

Labrador Retriever

Ventricular septal defect

Beagle, English Springer Spaniel, Keeshond, English Bulldog

Beagle, English Springer Spaniel

Atrial septal defect

Poodle, Dobermann, Boxer, Samoyed

Poodle

Mitral valve dysplasia

Bull Terrier, Rottweiler, Golden Retriever, Newfoundland,
Mastiff, German Shepherd Dog

Patent ductus arteriosus

Poodle, German Shepherd Dog, Pomeranian, Shetland
Sheepdog, Collie, Maltese, Yorkshire Terrier, Chihuahua,
Bichon Frise, Keeshond, American Cocker Spaniel, Rottweiler,
English Springer Spaniel, Labrador Retriever, Newfoundland

Poodle

Tetralogy of Fallot

Keeshond, English Bulldog, Wire-haired Fox Terrier, Miniature
Schnauzer, West Highland White Terrier

Keeshond

Persistent right
aortic arch

German Shepherd Dog, Irish Setter, German Short-haired
Pointer, Greyhound

German Short-haired Pointer

K22463_C007.indd 211

23/04/16 1:06 pm

212

Diseases of specific organ systems

hypertrophy and, sometimes, left atrial enlargement. The
turbulence and increased velocity of flow through the stenotic outflow tract creates a left systolic basilar murmur.
SAS predisposes to ventricular arrhythmias secondary to
myocardial ischemia due to the increase in myocardial
volume, diminished coronary blood flow, and subendocardial fibrosis. Less commonly, the increase in pressure
in the left atrium can lead to left-sided CHF.

Clinical presentation
Animals with moderate to severe SAS often present with
signs of failure to thrive, exercise intolerance, and syncope. Tachypnea or dyspnea associated with the development of CHF occurs in older dogs. Animals that develop
rapid and sustained ventricular tachyarrhythmias may
die suddenly. Physical examination reveals a left basilar
systolic murmur whose grade correlates with the degree
of SAS, weak femoral pulses when the stenosis is severe
and, on occasion, arrhythmias.

Differential diagnosis
PS, VSD, physiologic murmur.

Diagnosis
Thoracic radiographs may show a poststenotic dilation
of the aortic root. Definitive diagnosis is accomplished
via echocardiography, which allows visualization of the
location of the stenosis and the fibrous anomaly itself,
as well as the severity of secondary changes, including left ­ventricular concentric hypertophy and atrial dilation (Figure 7.22). A small amount of aortic i­nsufficiency
is also habitually present. Color-flow echocardiography
may show turbulent blood flow through the left ventricular outflow tract and can identify the severity of the
­stenosis based on the peak systolic aortic blood flow velocity. The severity of the stenosis is quantified by Doppler
A

B

Management
Moderate to severe SAS can be medically managed with
beta-blockers (atenolol, 0.5–1 mg/kg PO q12–24h) to slow
the heart rate, reduce myocardial oxygen demand, and
for their antiarrhythmic properties. The goal of medical
therapy is to decrease the frequency of syncopal episodes, improve exercise tolerance, and reduce the risk
of sudden death. Interventional procedures to relieve
the stenosis have had mixed results. Severe cases of SAS
with a poor long-term prognosis may benefit from cardiac catheterization with a cutting balloon to relieve the
pressure gradient across the stenosis, but this technique
is as yet unproven in terms of improving quality of life
and long-term outcome. The less common cases of valvular stenosis may improve with a more traditional balloon
valvuloplasty technique. CHF is managed as appropriate
with diuretic and ancillary medications. Antibiotics are
7.23

7.22

Figure 7.22 (A) Right parasternal long-axis echocardiographic
view showing a subaortic ridge (arrow). (B) Color Doppler
reveals turbulence in the aorta beyond the stenotic lesion.

K22463_C007.indd 212

echocardiography (Figure 7.23). A pressure gradient above
80 mmHg across the stenosis is consistent with severe SAS.
Boxers and Golden Retrievers, which are predisposed to
SAS, can also have mild forms of the disease that result
in soft murmurs that can be difficult to differentiate from
physiologic murmurs. In Boxers, a narrow left v
­ entricular
outflow tract compared with similar sized dogs may
explain the high prevalence of physiologic murmurs in this
breed. For breeds with a high prevalence of SAS, ­programs
that rely on auscultation and Doppler echocardiography to
differentiate healthy dogs with physiologic murmurs from
animals with mild SAS have usually been developed.

Figure 7.23 Continuous-wave Doppler recording of aortic flow
in a dog with severe subaortic stenosis. The ultrasound beam
has been oriented parallel to the blood flow from a left-sided
apical four-chamber echocardiographic view. Peak velocity
in systole is 6 m/sec (pressure gradient of 164 mmHg) and
consistent with severe subaortic stenosis (arrow). There is also
aortic insufficiency in diastole (*).

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

213

recommended during surgery and for dental prophylaxis
procedures because of the mildly increased risk of infective endocarditis found in patients with SAS.

Etiology

Prognosis

The obstruction to flow results in an increased pressure
within the right ventricle, causing concentric right ventricular hypertrophy and myocardial fibrosis with possible dilation of the right atrium. Turbulent blood flow
and increased velocity through the stenotic valve result
in a left basilar systolic murmur. Patients with severe
PS develop right-sided diastolic dysfunction and ultimately are at risk of right-sided CHF from chronic pressure overload. Right ventricular myocardial failure may
eventually result from severe PS. TVD is an occasional
concurrent congenital defect and results in exacerbation
of right heart dysfunction and more severe clinical signs.

Mild SAS has a good prognosis, but cases of moderate SAS
tend to develop CHF later in life. Dogs with severe SAS are
at significant risk of sudden death before 3–5 years of age.

PULMONIC STENOSIS
Definition/overview
PS results from a narrowed right ventricular outflow
tract in the region of the pulmonic valve, which can
occur at a subvalvular, valvular, or supravalvular level.
The most common manifestation in dogs is valvular. PS
is less common in cats. The lesion consists of thickening
or fusion of the valve leaflets, and may be accompanied
by ­hypoplasia of the valve annulus. English Bulldogs
often have an abnormal coronary vasculature, which
­consists of a single right coronary artery circling in front
of the pulmonary artery to supply blood to the left ventricle (R2A anomaly) (Figure 7.24). This vessel might contribute to the stenosis, and may rupture or be occluded
during balloon valvuloplasty, resulting in the dog’s death.
Other coronary abnormalities have been described in
dogs with PS.
7.24

PS is heritable in Beagles.

Pathophysiology

Clinical presentation
Most animals with PS will have no to mild clinical signs.
The approximately one-third of dogs with PS that do
exhibit clinical signs often present with dyspnea, lethargy, exercise intolerance, or syncope. In later stages,
signs associated with right-sided heart failure may be
present. Physical examination reveals a left-sided systolic
basilar murmur (with a concurrent right apical murmur
if tricuspid regurgitation is present). Jugular distension
is associated with an increase in right atrial pressure.
If right-sided CHF is present, abdominal palpation may
reveal the presence of ascites and hepatomegaly. The
presence of a patent foramen ovale at the atrial level can
be the site of right-to-left blood shunting, leading to cyanosis, hypoxemia, and polycythemia.

Differential diagnosis
SAS, physiologic murmur, tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), VSD.

Diagnosis

Figure 7.24 R2A anomaly in an English Bulldog. Aortogram
using a pigtail catheter reveals a single coronary artery
originating from the right coronary cusp (arrow). A branch
crosses in front of the aorta and supplies blood to the left
ventricle. Ao, aorta, BcT, brachiocephalic trunk.

K22463_C007.indd 213

Thoracic radiographs often show the presence of post­
stenotic dilation of the pulmonary trunk and right-sided
cardiomegaly. Echocardiography is used to determine
the structure of the pulmonic valve and the severity of
ventricular concentric hypertrophy and to detect the
presence of tricuspid insufficiency (Figure 7.25). Doppler
echocardiography is essential to determine the severity
of the stenosis. Continuous-wave Doppler is used to determine the peak systolic pressure gradient across the stenosis. Good alignment of the Doppler beam with blood
flow can usually be obtained from the right parasternal
short-axis view at the level of the pulmonary artery or
from a left cranial window along the sternum. The severity of the stenosis is based on peak systolic pressure gradient. It is mild when the peak gradient is between 20 and

23/04/16 1:06 pm

214

Diseases of specific organ systems

49 mmHg (velocity of 2.25–3.5 m/sec), moderate when
peak ­gradient is between 50 and 80 mmHg (velocity of
3.5–4.5 m/sec), and severe if the peak gradient is above
80 mmHg (velocity above 4.5 m/sec).

mild PS or those with mild clinical signs, beta-blockers
can be used to reduce myocardial oxygen demand and for
their antiarrhythmic properties.

Management

Prognosis varies based on the severity of the stenosis.

The goal of treatment is to reduce the systolic right ventricular pressure overload. This is accomplished in cases
of moderate to severe PS via surgical procedures or balloon valvuloplasty. Balloon valvuloplasty works best in
cases of valvular stenosis without hypoplasia of the valve
annulus (Figure 7.26). Generally, a reduction of 40–50%
can be expected in the pressure gradient, and this reduction is maintained in the majority of cases. In cases of
7.25

A

Prognosis

PATENT DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS
Definition/overview
The ductus arteriosus during fetal development serves to
shunt oxygenated blood from maternal circulation away
from the fetal lungs directly to the systemic circulation.
When the lungs inflate at birth, reversal of the blood
flow brings oxygenated blood from the aorta through the
ductus and stimulates constriction of the ductus smooth
muscle. Normally, the ductus closes by 7–10 days after
birth. A PDA occurs when the ductus remains patent past
this period, allowing blood to shunt according to the pressure gradient.

Etiology

B

Figure 7.25 Right parasternal short-axis echocardiographic
view from a dog with pulmonic valve stenosis. The valve is
shown in diastole (A). In systole, the valve takes a dome-like
shape (B).
7.26

PDA is considered heritable in Poodles.

Pathophysiology
In most cases, a PDA results in blood shunting from the
aorta to the pulmonary artery (left-to-right shunt) and a
left-sided volume overload. The blood shunting directly to
the pulmonary circulation returns to the left side of the
heart. As a result, the left ventricle and left atrium become
dilated. Large shunts increase the filling pressure in the
left heart and pulmonary veins, with the end result being
left-sided CHF. The severity of the shunt (mostly determined by the size of the patent vessel) and the presence of
other defects result in varying progression of secondary
changes. In rare cases with large shunts and severe PH,
shunt reversal is observed. Blood thus flows from the pulmonary artery to the aorta – a right-to-left shunt – causing
a differential cyanosis, hypoxemia, and eventually polycythemia (Eisenmenger’s physiology). Shunt reversal typically occurs in puppies that are a few days to a few weeks
old. It is not the usual progression of a PDA in adult dogs.

Clinical presentation

Figure 7.26 Fluroscopic view during balloon valvuloplasty.
The catheter is inserted from a femoral vein and positioned at
the level of the pulmonic valve. During inflation a waist is seen
in the center of the balloon. Abrupt expansion of the balloon
usually results in a successful procedure.

K22463_C007.indd 214

Clinical signs vary based on the size of the shunt, the
direction of the shunt, and the presence of CHF. Signs may
include exercise intolerance, syncope, cough or dyspnea,
and, in the case of a reverse shunt, hindlimb weakness
or seizures. On physical examination of animals with a
left-to-right PDA, a pathognomonic continuous (machinery) murmur is heard cranially in the left axillary region.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

Bounding femoral pulses may be palpated due to diastolic run-off. In animals with a reverse PDA, there is no
audible murmur, but careful inspection of the mucous
membranes should reveal differential cyanosis, that is
cyanosis limited to the caudal mucous membranes.

215

or other devices produced specifically to interrupt blood
flow across the shunt (occluder, vascular plug) (Figure
7.29). Residual flow after intervention, if present, may
decrease over time. The risk of infection of the implants
7.28

Differential diagnosis
Aortopulmonary window, which is a connection between
the ascending aorta and the pulmonary trunk. A to-andfro murmur from aortic stenosis and insufficiency could
mimic the continuous murmur heard with a PDA.

Diagnosis
Thoracic radiographs may show left-sided cardiomegaly, pulmonary overcirculation, signs of CHF, and a ductal aneurysm of the aorta at the insertion of the ductus.
Electrocardiography frequently shows a tall R wave
in lead II (indicative of left ventricular enlargement).
Echocardiography is necessary to confirm the presence
of the shunt, evaluate the severity of left heart chamber
enlargement, and identify concurrent CHDs and the presence of mild to severe PH. Measurement of the shunt is
performed to determine suitable procedures for shunt
closure (Figure 7.27).

Management
PDAs are best treated with early closure, either by surgical or cardiac catheterization procedures. Medical treatment for patients in CHF is indicated prior to closure.
Small patients not amenable to catheterization are best
treated surgically; surgery performed by experienced surgeons has a success rate of up to 95% (Figure 7.28). Other
current interventional procedures used to close shunts
use catheterization to place coils (coil embolization)

Figure 7.28 Surgical ligation for a patent ductus arteriosus
(arrow) from a left thoracotomy. Ao, aorta; PA, pulmonary
artery; LAu, left auricle.
7.29

7.27

A

B

Figure 7.27 (A) Transthoracic echocardiographic view of a
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). Measurements of the PDA
diameters are obtained. (B) Color Doppler reveals turbulence
(mosaic of colors) in the pulmonary artery. PA, pulmonary
artery; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; Ao, aorta.

K22463_C007.indd 215

Figure 7.29 Lateral thoracic radiograph from a dog after
patent ductus arteriosus occlusion with an Amplatz Canine Duct
Occluder (*). (Manufacturer: Infiniti Medical, LLC)

23/04/16 1:06 pm

216

Diseases of specific organ systems

is unknown; antibiotics are recommended during surgery and for dental prophylaxis procedures for 1 year
after the implant is placed. Closure of reverse PDAs is
contraindicated.

Prognosis
Secondary changes can reverse with early and successful closure of the PDA, and in these cases prognosis is
­excellent. Animals with a PDA that is not closed rarely
live past 1 year of age, although some, albeit rare, have
been known to live well into adulthood with an uncorrected PDA.

VENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECTS
Definition/overview
VSDs are defects that allow communication between the
left and right ventricles. The most common form is a defect
in the membranous, or upper, portion of the septum. It is
the most common congenital cardiac defect in cats.

Etiology
VSDs are heritable defects in Keeshonds and English
Springer Spaniels.

Pathophysiology
Blood shunts from left to right during systole. Because of
the location of VSDs in the upper portion of the outflow
tract, the increased blood flow enters almost immediately into the pulmonary artery and returns to the left
heart. Therefore, VSDs in dogs and cats typically result
in volume overload of the left ventricle and atrium. The
outcome of a VSD depends on the size of the defect and
the pressure gradient between the systemic and the
pulmonary circulation. Small VSDs that restrict blood
flow have minimal hemodynamic consequences. Larger
VSDs can result in left-sided volume overload and, subsequently, left-sided CHF. They also have the potential to
cause significant pulmonary overcirculation and lead to
PH. In the presence of severe PH, right ventricular pressure may exceed left ventricular pressure during part of
or the entire duration of the cardiac cycle, resulting in
reversal of the shunt (right-to-left shunt) and cyanosis
(Eisenmenger’s physiology).

Clinical presentation
Physical examination findings associated with a VSD
depend on the size of the shunt and the pressure g
­ radient
between the pulmonary and the systemic circulation.
Left-to-right shunts result in a right-sided, sternal or left
basilar systolic murmur depending on the location of the
septal defect on the interventricular septum. Smaller

K22463_C007.indd 216

VSDs often result in a greater velocity of blood flow
through the shunt and may have a louder murmur, but
are often associated with fewer secondary changes. Blood
overflow through a VSD located in the basilar portion of
the septum may damage the cusps of the aortic valve,
leading to aortic insufficiency and a left basilar diastolic
murmur on auscultation. A large VSD allowing pressures
between the two ventricles to equalize may cause a softer
murmur or no audible murmur at all. Signs associated
with CHF or hypoxemia may be present.

Differential diagnosis
Mitral regurgitation, tricuspid regurgitation, SAS, PS.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by visualization of the defect or the
shunt with color-flow Doppler echocardiography. On
echocardiography, the size of the VSD can be compared
with the diameter of the aortic annulus. Small VSDs are
less than 25%, moderate VSDs are between 25 and 75%,
and large VSDs are more than 75% the aortic diameter.
Various parameters are assessed to determine the clinical
significance of VSDs. The direction and velocity of blood
flow across small defects is recorded by Doppler imaging. Color Doppler technique is used to scan the surface
of the interventricular septum from different views and
demonstrates a left-to-right turbulent, high velocity jet
during systole (Figure 7.30). Blood flow velocity measurements recorded by continuous-wave Doppler are used to
estimate the pressure gradient across the defect using the
simplified Bernoulli’s equation. The normal pressure gradient between the ventricles is around 100 mmHg (which
corresponds to blood flow velocity of approximately
5 m/sec). Assessment of left atrium and ventricle size and
assessment of left ventricular function can be done with
Doppler imaging.
The size of restrictive VSDs determines the risk of left
ventricular volume overload and CHF. The clinical significance is better determined by measuring the size of the
left-sided cardiac chambers. Follow-up examinations are
usually necessary to determine the long-term hemodynamic consequences of a VSD.

Management
VSDs are treated based on the severity of secondary changes and clinical signs. Small VSDs may not
require any intervention and have a good prognosis. Hemodynamically significant left-to-right VSDs
are ­
managed medically when signs of left-sided CHF
occur. The cyanosis and polycythemia that result from
right-to-left VSDs may improve with sildenafil, which
­targets PH.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

7.30

217

Differential diagnosis
Mild SAS, mild PS, physiologic murmur.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by echocardiographic visualization of
the defect.

Management
Most small ASDs do not require treatment. Large
defects cause right heart failure if not treated surgically, which may be difficult due to limited access and
expense. Right heart failure is managed medically, if it
develops.
Figure 7.30 Right parasternal short-axis echocardiographic
view confirming the presence of a ventricular septal defect with
color-flow Doppler. Turbulent blood flow is seen entering the
right ventricle from a defect located just below the aorta in the
perimembranous portion of the interventricular septum. Ao,
aorta; LA, left atrium.

Prognosis

Prognosis
Prognosis varies based on the size of the ASD. Most small
ASDs have an excellent prognosis.

MITRAL VALVE DYSPLASIA
Definition/overview

ATRIAL SEPTAL DEFECTS

Mitral valve dysplasia (MVD) occurs from malformation
of the mitral valve apparatus and can include the valve
leaflets, chordae tendineae, or papillary muscles. Large
breed dogs are predisposed.

Definition/overview

Pathophysiology

ASDs are defects that occur due to malformation of the
septum primum and septum secondum.

Severe MVD causes significant mitral regurgitation
and can cause secondary changes similar to degenerative valvular disease. In dogs, valve insufficiency
frequently occurs in combination with valve stenosis.
Long-term complications include the development of
left-sided CHF.

Prognosis varies based on the size of the VSD.

Pathophysiology
ASDs typically result in a left-to-right shunt of blood. This
may cause dilation of the right heart, pulmonary overcirculation, and right heart failure. However, most shunts
are small and have minimal hemodynamic consequences.
When right-sided heart disease results in elevated right
atrial pressures, the direction of blood flow across the
ASD may change.

Clinical presentation
ASDs rarely cause a murmur because the low volume and
low pressure gradient across the defect do not result in
high velocity turbulent blood flow. On occasion, a soft left
basilar systolic blood flow is ausculted. This is due to the
increased volume of blood circulating within the right
ventricular outflow tract, which becomes t­urbulent.
Most ASDs remain asymptomatic. Large defects or those
associated with another congenital defect may result in
signs of right heart failure or shunt reversal with various
degrees of cyanosis and hypoxemia.

K22463_C007.indd 217

Clinical presentation
Physical examination findings with MVD include a left
apical systolic murmur whose intensity correlates with
the severity of the regurgitation. Signs associated with
arrhythmias or CHF may be present.

Differential diagnosis
Mitral regurgitation from degenerative valve disease, DCM.

Diagnosis
Thoracic radiographs and echocardiography may
show variable levels of left-sided heart enlargement;
if CHF is present, signs of pulmonary edema in dogs or
edema and/or pleural effusion in cats may be present.
Echocardiography will reveal the abnormalities of the
mitral valve apparatus.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

218

Diseases of specific organ systems

Management

II

Medical management consists of treating heart failure
and any arrhythmias.

Prognosis
Prognosis is poor due to the early onset of arrhythmias
and/or CHF.

7.31

Figure 7.31 ECG from a dog with tricuspid dysplasia. There
is a sinus rhythm with splintered QRS complexes (arrows).
(Amplitude 10 mm/mV, speed 50 mm/sec)

TRICUSPID VALVE DYSPLASIA

7.32

Definition/overview
TVD occurs from malformation of the tricuspid valve
apparatus and can include the valve leaflets, chordae
tendineae, or papillary muscles.

Etiology
TVD is the most common CHD in Labrador Retrievers and
is heritable in that breed.

Pathophysiology
TVD causes significant tricuspid regurgitation and can
cause elevations in right atrial pressures and development of right-sided CHF.

Clinical presentation
Physical examinations findings with TVD include
a right apical systolic murmur; however, mild TVD
may not result in an auscultable murmur. Signs
associated with ­
­
arrhythmias or CHF may be present.
A common ­arrhythmia in dogs with TVD is atrial fibrillation (AF).

Differential diagnosis

Figure 7.32 Right parasternal long-axis echocardiographic
view from a dog with tricuspid dysplasia. The right atrium
is markedly dilated and the parietal leaflet of the tricuspid
valve is elongated (*). RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle;
LA, left atrium.

Prognosis
Prognosis is poor when tricuspid valve regurgitation is
severe due to the early onset of arrhythmias and/or CHF.
Dogs with mild TVD have a normal life expectancy.

Tricuspid regurgitation, VSD, DCM.

TETRALOGY OF FALLOT

Diagnosis

Definition/overview

Radiographically, dogs with TVD often have dramatic right
atrial enlargement, a dilated caudal vena cava, and hepatomegaly. Cats have an enlarged right atrium and a dilated,
tortuous caudal vena cava. Right heart f­ ailure in dogs may
cause signs of jugular venous ­distension, hepatomegaly,
and ascites. Electrocardiography may show supraventricular arrhythmias, and splintered QRS complexes are a
common finding in dogs (Figure 7.31). Echocardiography
reveals structural abnormalities of the tricuspid valve
apparatus (Figure 7.32).

The four defects that form the TOF consist of a VSD, dextroposition of the aorta, PS, and the resulting right ventricular concentric hypertrophy. Abnormal development
of the conotruncal septum results in this combination of
defects.

Management
TVD is treated medically by managing CHF and
arrhythmias.

K22463_C007.indd 218

Etiology
TOF is heritable in Keeshonds.

Pathophysiology
PS increases the right ventricular pressures and results in
various degrees of right-to-left shunting across the VSD.
The consequences include cyanosis, hypoxemia, and polycythemia. Concurrent CHD may be present.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

Clinical presentation
TOF is usually accompanied by a systolic murmur
­originating from the PS and/or the VSD. Animals with TOF
may develop episodes of respiratory difficulties when
the right-to-left shunting worsens, causing ­
systemic
hypoxemia.

Differential diagnosis
PS, VSD.

Diagnosis
Thoracic radiographs show right heart enlargement and
pulmonary undercirculation. Echocardiography allows
for visualization of the VSD, quantification of PS severity,
the displacement of the aortic root towards the right side,
and right ventricular hypertrophy. Color-flow Doppler is
needed to visualize the shunt.

Management
Medical management is aimed at limiting right-to left
shunting and hypoxemia by blunting the decrease in
­systemic vascular resistance in response to exercise with
the administration of oral nonselective ­beta-blockers (propranolol). Phlebotomies are indicated when polycythemia
is responsible for clinical signs (usually PCV above 70%).

219

concurrent anomaly. PRAA alone does not result in
­cardiac abnormalities.

Clinical presentation
PRAA is usually suspected based on the onset of regurgitation when a puppy is introduced to solid food. This
occurs due to esophageal constriction by the vascular
ring. Signs of aspiration pneumonia may be present.

Differential diagnosis
Esophageal stricture, congenital megaesophagus, other
gastrointestinal (GI) disorders.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is often made based on clinical signs and thoracic radiographs. Thoracic radiographs show leftward
deviation of the trachea cranial to the border of the heart
in ventrodorsal views, and barium esophagrams can aid
in diagnosis based on constriction of the esophagus at the
heart base with cranial dilatation (see Figures 8.15–8.17).
Definitive diagnosis may require advanced imaging or
surgical exploration.

Management

VASCULAR RING ANOMALIES

Surgical ligation is the treatment of choice for PRAA
and other vascular anomalies resulting in constricting
­vascular rings. Surgical procedures vary based on the
type of vascular ring and the presence of concurrent
anomalies. Early surgical treatment is recommended to
prevent progressive esophageal dysfunction, although
there have been reports of successful surgical treatment
in adult dogs.

Definition/overview

Prognosis

Vascular ring anomalies occur from persistence of vessels
that normally regress during development, or abnormalities in vessel formation. The most common vascular ring
is a persistent right aortic arch (PRAA).

Prognosis is good with early intervention and dietary
modification.

Etiology

DEGENERATIVE MITRAL VALVE DISEASE

There is evidence that PRAA is heritable in German Shorthaired Pointers and Greyhounds.

Definition/overview

Prognosis
Prognosis varies based on the severity of the shunt and
right ventricular pressure overload. Most dogs with TOF
reach the age of 5 years.

Pathophysiology
Normally, the right aortic arch develops into the
­brachiocephalic trunk and right subclavian artery and
the left aortic arch persists as the dorsal aorta. When the
right aorta persists with a left ligamentum arteriosum, a
­vascular ring forms around the trachea and esophagus
with the heart base forming the last portion of the ring.
A retroesophageal subclavian artery is the most ­common

K22463_C007.indd 219

ACQUIRED VALVULAR DISEASES

Degenerative mitral valve disease is the most common
form of acquired cardiovascular disease in dogs, representing approximately 75% of all cardiology cases seen in
practice. It particularly affects small breed, middle aged
to older dogs and an earlier onset has been reported in
males. There are known breed predispositions, such as the
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel and Dachshund. However,
large breed dogs may also develop the disease. The mitral
valve is affected alone in 60% of cases, the tricuspid valve

23/04/16 1:06 pm

220

Diseases of specific organ systems

alone in 10% of cases, and both valves are affected in 30%
of cases. Rarely, involvement of the aortic and pulmonic
valves is seen.

Etiology
The etiology is unknown, although there is a known
genetic component. It has been suggested that there are
predisposing abnormalities/disruptions in the collagen
and extracellular matrix components, with accumulation
of proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans in the spongiosa layer of the valve. Although the inciting factor for
degenerative valve disease is not certain, high levels of
circulating serotonin have been shown to cause valvular
changes.

it is important to confirm the diagnosis with
­echocardiography. Radiography should also be used to
assist in assessing disease severity, presence/absence of
CHF, and disease progression. Generalized cardiomegaly
with left atrial and left ventricular enlargement is seen
radiographically in dogs that are stage B and higher. If
CHF is present, an interstitial-to-alveolar pattern is commonly seen in the perihilar and caudal lobar regions.
Echocardiography will show a thickened and irregular
valve (Figure 7.33), valvular insufficiency during systole
(Figure 7.34), and atrial and ventricular eccentric hypertrophy dependent on the affected valve(s).

Management

Myxomatous lesions of the valve progress over time.
These abnormalities also extend to the chordae tendineae. These changes lead to thickening of the free edge of
the valve leaflets and secondary fibrosis causes contracture of the valve leaflets and chordae, preventing normal coaptation. This scenario leads to various degrees of
regurgitation, leading to left-sided volume overload and
atrial and ventricular enlargement.

Management depends on the stage of the disease present.
Animals in stage A do not require therapy. There is disagreement regarding stage B dogs, as studies in humans
have shown benefit of ACE inhibitor therapy, but it was
unclear in veterinary clinical trials. It is possible that ACE
inhibitors benefit dogs when the disease is compensated
but severe left atrial enlargement is present. Stage C and
D dogs should be treated with the appropriate medications to control the signs of CHF (see Congestive heart
failure, Management).

Clinical presentation

Prognosis

The clinical presentation varies with the severity of the
disease. Very early in the disease process, the only abnormality on physical examination may be a systolic click
associated with mitral valve prolapse. In most cases, the
first clinical sign is a systolic murmur with a PMI in the
region of the mitral valve. Worsening of the murmur
intensity usually coincides with worsening disease severity. Coughing and exercise intolerance are also common
presenting complaints. Often dogs will remain preclinical
for long periods of time and will only show clinical signs
at the onset of CHF (Table 7.9).

Disease progression and prognosis are variable, with
many dogs remaining asymptomatic for their entire lifetime. However, from onset of CHF, the average survival
time is 12–18 months with medical management.

Pathophysiology

7.33

Differential diagnosis
The differential diagnoses for systolic heart murmurs
are reviewed in the physical examination section of
this chapter. Differential diagnoses for the respiratory
signs seen include CHF, pneumonia, compression of the
left mainstem bronchus by the enlarged left atrium, tracheal collapse, and primary lower airway disease such as
chronic bronchitis.

Diagnosis
The diagnosis of degenerative mitral valve disease
is generally easily made based on physical examination findings and patient signalment. However,

K22463_C007.indd 220

Figure 7.33 Right parasternal long-axis echocardiographic
view from a dog with severe degenerative mitral valve
disease. The septal leaflet of the mitral valve (*) is markedly
thickened and prolapses into the left atrium. LA, left atrium;
LV, left ventricle.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

7.34

LV

221

chordal tissue, leading to valvular insufficiency and
­possible s­ tenosis. Acute vegetative lesions are composed
of an inner layer of platelets, fibrin, red blood cells,
white blood cells, and some bacteria; a middle layer of
bacteria; and an outer layer of fibrin. These vegetations
are f­riable and ­
commonly embolize to distant sites
(Figure 7.35).

Clinical presentation

Figure 7.34 Color Doppler showing severe mitral valve
regurgitation filling more than 50% of the left atrium. The
mosaic of color indicates turbulent blood flow. LV, left ventricle.

BACTERIAL ENDOCARDITIS
Definition/overview
Endocarditis corresponds to an infection and secondary
inflammation of the endocardial surface following a transient or persistent bacteremia. Vegetative endocarditis
occurs when vegetations composed of platelets, fibrin,
bacteria, and inflammatory cells are found adhered to
heart valves. Clinical signs vary widely and are vague,
making recognition difficult. The reported incidence of
infectious endocarditis in dogs and cats is very low, with
the highest incidence in male, middle aged, medium to
large breed dogs, particularly German Shepherd Dogs.

The clinical presentation is highly variable and
nonspecific, with the most common clinical signs
­
being waxing and waning fever, lethargy, depression,
anorexia, weight loss, shifting leg lameness, dyspnea,
and ­tachypnea. These signs can be acute or chronic and
are related to the organs affected by bacteremia, septic
thrombi, and secondary immune complex formation and
deposition.
A new or changing murmur is considered highly
suggestive for endocarditis, although lack of a murmur
should not preclude the diagnosis. Both systolic (more
common) and diastolic murmurs occur, along with
arrhythmias. CHF, polyarthritis, and glomerulonephritis
are common sequelae.

Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses for systolic heart murmurs are
reviewed in the physical examination section of this
chapter. Infectious, inflammatory, and immune-mediated
causes of glomerulonephritis, polyarthritis, and fever of
unknown origin should also be ruled out.

Etiology

7.35

Endothelial damage in conjunction with bacteremia
is required for infectious endocarditis to develop. The
underlying cause of the damage to the endothelium is
unproven, although patients with SAS are at increased
risk. It is usually not possible to identify the origin of
the bacteremia. The most common bacterial isolates are
Staphylococcus spp. and Escherichia coli, with Streptococcus
spp., Corynebacteria spp., and Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae
also reported. Recently, Bartonella spp. have emerged as
important causative agents.

Pathophysiology
In companion animals, infectious endocarditis involves
mitral and aortic valve tissue in the majority of cases.
Once endothelial damage has occurred, bacteria bind
and are covered by fibrin. Additional layers of ­bacteria
and fibrin are deposited to form vegetative lesions,
which lead to the destruction of normal valvular and

K22463_C007.indd 221

Figure 7.35 Vegetative lesion (arrow) on the aortic valve
of a dog.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

222

Diseases of specific organ systems

Diagnosis
Recognition and diagnosis of endocarditis can be very
difficult, in part because of the vague clinical signs and
clinicopathologic findings. Radiography may be unremarkable or may show cardiomegaly and signs of leftsided CHF. ECG will often show rhythm disturbances,
with ventricular rhythms and AV block being most common. Echocardiography is the gold standard of diagnostics and will often show a hyperechoic, independently
oscillating lesion on the affected valve (Figure 7.36).
Clinicopathologic laboratory findings can help support
the diagnosis, but are often nonspecific. They include leukocytosis, nonregenerative anemia, thrombocytopenia,
hypoalbuminemia, an elevated alkaline phosphatase,
and azotemia. Urinalysis may show changes consistent
with a glomerulonephritis or bacterial infection, which
may be the source of bacteremia or secondary to it. Blood
cultures should be taken, although they have both a low
sensitivity and low specificity. A negative culture should
not be used to exclude the diagnosis of endocarditis.

Management
The goals of treatment are to sterilize the vegetative
lesion and address cardiac and systemic complications.
Bactericidal therapy should be instituted based on culture
and sensitivity. Prior to obtaining culture results, or if culture is negative, empiric broad-spectrum coverage with
penicillin, potentiated penicillin, or 1st or 2nd g
­ eneration
cephalosporin along with either a fluoroquinolone or an
aminoglycoside should be chosen. Antibiotics at the upper
end of the dosing range should be administered parenterally for 1–2 weeks followed by oral administration
7.36

for 6–12 weeks. If Bartonella is suspected or confirmed,
azithromycin (5–10 mg/kg PO q24h for 7 days, then
­
every other day for 6–12 weeks) or doxycycline should be
administered. Treatment with corticosteroids is contraindicated and confers a negative prognosis. Though anticoagulation therapy was proposed in the past, no benefit
has been proven and it may increase the risk of hemorrhage. Cessation of therapy should be determined based
on serial monitoring of echocardiograms, body temperature, CBC, and repeat blood and urine cultures.

Prognosis
Prognosis for vegetative infectious endocarditis is
guarded to grave in both canine and feline patients. Aortic
valve endocarditis, thrombocytopenia, and glomerulonephritis are also associated with worse prognosis.

CANINE CARDIOMYOPATHY
Cardiomyopathies are diseases that affect the heart
muscle. When the cause is unknown, the term primary
­cardiomyopathy is used. When a cause can be identified
for the heart muscle disease, the term secondary cardiomyopathy is used. The disease can then be described
based on the underlying cause; for example, ‘adriamycin
(doxorubicin) cardiomyopathy’. Cardiomyopathy is one
of the most common acquired cardiovascular diseases in
dogs second only to degenerative valve disease and heartworm disease depending on the geographical location.
The most common myocardial disease in dogs is DCM.

DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY
Definition/overview
DCM is a primary myocardial disease characterized by
decreased systolic function and subsequent ventricular
dilation. This disease is most commonly seen in large
breed dogs with Dobermanns, Great Danes, and Irish
Wolfhounds being overrepresented. Some medium size
breeds such as Cocker and English Spaniels may also
develop the disease. Significant variation of disease
presentation, progression, and prognosis can be seen
depending of the breed of dog.

Etiology

Figure 7.36 Right parasternal echocardiographic view from a
dog with a vegetative lesion (arrow) on the aortic valve. LA, left
atrium; LV, left ventricle; Ao, aorta.

K22463_C007.indd 222

The cause of DCM is not known but a genetic cause is suspected. In Dobermanns, DCM has been shown to be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Recently, a splice
deletion in the pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 gene
(a gene involved in the regulation of myocardial energy
utilization) has been associated with DCM in this breed.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

Pathophysiology
Myocardial changes secondary to DCM lead to eccentric
hypertrophy of the ventricles, which is usually more
pronounced on the left side. In addition, left ventricular
systolic function is markedly reduced. Over time, left ventricular enlargement leads to dilation of the mitral valve
annulus and secondary mitral regurgitation. Left atrial
enlargement results from volume overload, impaired
ventricular filling, and secondary mitral regurgitation.
Ventricular arrhythmias are caused by the disruption of
the normal architecture of the ventricular myocardium,
and various triggers such as increased adrenergic tone,
electrolyte imbalances, and hypoxemia. AF is more likely
to occur when the left atrium is markedly dilated and
fibrotic.

Clinical presentation
In general, DCM has an adult onset with male dogs being
affected more commonly. However, Portuguese Water
Dogs often develop the disease before 12 weeks of age.
Clinically, two phases of the disease can be detected: an
occult or asymptomatic phase and an overt phase. In the
occult phase, there are no clinical signs; however, arrhythmias or myocardial changes are present. The occult phase
is variable and may last months to years. More commonly, the disease is not diagnosed until the overt stage
when exercise intolerance, CHF, or syncope is noted. In
some dogs, sudden death may be the first and only sign of
disease. This is especially true for Dobermanns, in which
sudden death can be the first sign of disease in approximately 30–50% of affected dogs.

Differential diagnosis
Other causes of left ventricular dilation in large breed
dogs, including tachycardiomyopathy, cardiomyopathy
secondary to taurine deficiency or doxorubicin toxicity,
and myocarditis. Primary mitral valve insufficiency is
associated with left ventricular systolic dysdunction,
which may mimic DCM. Chronic cardiac changes of leftto-right shunt, especially PDAs in adult dogs, ressemble
those of DCM.

Diagnosis
During physical examination, a grade 1 to 3/6 systolic murmur (a result of mitral insufficiency due to annular dilation) and/or an S3 gallop sound (indicating left ventricular
dilation) may be noted over the left apex. A weak femoral
pulse (a result of decreased stroke volume due to poor
contractility) is a common finding. An irregular rhythm
along with pulse deficits may be present as ventricular
arrhythmias and AF are commonly seen in these dogs.

K22463_C007.indd 223

223

Arrhythmias are often an early indication of disease and
breeds predisposed should be screened with ECG and
Holter monitor. Detection of ventricular premature complexes in an asymptomatic dog, particularly a Dobermann,
should raise a high level of suspicion for occult cardiomyopathy. Sinus tachycardia, AF, and ventricular tachycardia
are commonly seen in dogs with DCM. Giant breeds such
as the Great Dane and Irish Wolfhound are more likely to
develop AF, whereas Dobermanns are more likely to have
ventricular arrhythmias. Arrhythmias are often noted
around 2–4 years of age and can vary from single ventricular premature complexes to life-threatening ventricular
tachycardia. Electrocardiographic changes s­uggesting
left ventricular enlargement (R wave amplitude >3.0 mV)
and conduction disturbances such as right or left bundle
branch block may also be noted. It is important to note
that a normal ECG does not rule out the presence of DCM.
On radiographs, generalized cardiomegaly may be noted
in dogs with DCM. However, radiographs are not sensitive to mild cardiac changes, therefore cardiomegaly is
better assessed with echocardiography, particularly in
the occult stage of the disease. In the overt stage, radiographs are more valuable in helping to diagnose CHF,
showing pulmonary venous distension and pulmonary
edema. Due to their chest conformation, the degree of
cardiomegaly may be underestimated in Dobermanns.
Echocardiography is essential for the evaluation of cardiac enlargement and function. The classic sign of DCM
on an echocardiogram is systolic dysfunction. This is
seen as reduction in FS and ejection fraction (most accurately measured with the Simpson’s method) along with
increases in E point-to-septal separation and left ventricular end-systolic diameter. Increased left ventricular
end-diastolic diameter as well as left atrial enlargement
are seen as the disease progresses (Figure 7.37). Early in
the disease, affected individuals may only have ventricular arrhythmias and normal echocardiograms. Therefore,
it is important that when screening for the occult phase
of the disease, both echocardiogram and Holter monitor
evaluation are performed. A central jet of mitral regurgitation (secondary to annular dilation) can be found with
moderate or severe left ventricular dilation. If concurrent
degenerative valve disease is present, the mitral regurgitation jet will be more prominent and the degree of atrial
dilation may be disproportional when compared with the
degree of systolic dysfunction.

Management
In dogs with DCM and heart failure, standard CHF therapy is initiated with antiarrhythmic therapy used as
needed based on the arrhythmia burden. Administration

23/04/16 1:06 pm

224

Diseases of specific organ systems

A

B

LV

7.37

LV
LA

Figure 7.37 Right parasternal long-axis (A) and short-axis
(B) views from a dog with dilated cardiomyopathy. The left
ventricle appears markedly dilated. The ECG shows sinus
tachycardia with wide QRS complexes, consistent with a left
bundle branch block. LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle.

of pimobendan delays the onset of CHF and extended
­survival in Dobermanns with occult DCM. Syncope is
often the result of rapid ventricular tachycardia in DCM
dogs. When this is seen, antiarrhythmic treatment is
needed to control the syncope. Antiarrhythmic treatment does not prevent sudden death and many dogs
with syncope will die suddenly, especially Dobermanns.
Less likely causes of syncope in DCM include collapse
due to decreased cardiac output, vasovagal syncope or,
on occasion, secondary to the onset of AF. Treatment
of ventricular arrhythmias includes the use of sotalol monotherapy or a combination of mexiletine and a
beta-blocker.

Prognosis
Prognosis with DCM varies with breed and severity of
disease but mostly is considered fair to poor, especially
after the onset of CHF. The majority of dogs with DCM
presenting for the development of CHF survive approximately 6–12 months. In some Cocker Spaniels, the disease
may be associated with taurine deficiency and subsequent improvement may occur with supplementation.
Dobermanns with DCM may carry a worse prognosis
compared with other breeds. Onset of CHF at a young age
and the presence of ascites and AF also carry a negative
prognosis.

English Bulldogs. It is typically an adult-onset disease,
but it can be diagnosed in dogs as young as 1 year of age.

Etiology
In humans, mutations in multiple genes coding for intercalated disc proteins have been associated with ARVC. In
Boxers, only one genetic mutation has been associated
with ARVC to date; it affects the striatin gene. Boxers positive for the striatin mutation have a higher number of
VPCs on 24-hour Holter recordings.

Pathophysiology
ARVC is characterized by fatty or fibro-fatty myocardial
replacement, predominantly in the right ventricle and,
to a lower extent, the left ventricle and the left and right
atria (Figure 7.38).

Clinical presentation
Clinically, the disease is characterized by ventricular
tachycardia, right ventricular enlargement, syncope,
and sudden death. There are three stages to the disease,
which may be observed in succession as ARVC worsens:
(1) initially, the patient is asymptomatic and ventricular
arrhythmias are an incidental finding during physical
examination for an unrelated condition; (2) the patient
presents for syncope associated with the ventricular
arrhythmias; and (3) the patient presents with signs of
CHF secondary to systolic dysfunction and frequently a
history of weakness or syncope related to the arrhythmias.

7.38

ARRHYTHMOGENIC RIGHT VENTRICULAR
­CARDIOMYOPATHY (BOXER CARDIOMYOPATHY)
Definition/overview
In dogs, ARVC is a myocardial disease dominated by ventricular arrhythmias and clinical signs of syncope. Most
dogs have normal ventricular size and function at the
time they develop the arrhythmia. The disease is primarily seen in Boxers but has also been documented,
although less frequently, in other breeds including

K22463_C007.indd 224

Figure 7.38 Histopathology of the myocardium of a Boxer
with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
revealing fatty replacement of the myocytes and interstitial
fibrosis. The Masson trichrome stain shows collagen in blue.
Magnification ×70.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

Similar to Dobermanns with DCM, in some cases sudden
death is the first and only sign of the disease.

Differential diagnosis
Myocarditis and other causes for left ventricular
­enlargement and arrhythmias, including tachycardiomyopathy and doxorubicin toxicitiy.

Diagnosis
The most common physical examination finding reported
is the detection of an arrhythmia; this can be either single
premature beats or paroxysms of tachycardia. On occasion, the arrhythmia is permanent when AF is present.
Another physical examination abnormality common
with ARVC is the presence of a systolic murmur on auscultation. Apical systolic murmurs result from mitral or
tricuspid insufficiency caused by the annular dilation
that accompanies cardiomegaly. Less frequently, a cardiac gallop is detected. Left basilar systolic murmurs may
be noted in some Boxers, but these should not be linked to
ARVC as they are usually physiologic or secondary to SAS.
The most common electrocardiographic change noted
is ventricular ectopy, in the form of ventricular premature complexes (singles, couplets, triplets, or bigeminy)
or ventricular tachycardia. The ventricular ectopic beats
tend to arise from the right ventricular myocardium, and
are classically described as having a left bundle branch
block pattern morphology with a predominantly positive
deflection of the QRS complex in leads II, III, and aVF. If
severe, the ventricular tachycardia can lead to syncopal
episodes and potentially sudden death. The frequency of
the ventricular beats can have as much as an 80% day to
day variation with ARVC. To increase the possibility of
identifying these arrhythmias, 24-hour Holter monitoring is recommended if there is evidence of arrhythmia on
auscultation or a history of clinical signs such as syncope
(Figure 7.39). Repeating a Holter recording or the use of an
18:27:26

N

N

N

N

N

7.39

V V V V V V V V V V V V V V V V V V

Figure 7.39 Holter recording from a Boxer with
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy showing a
run of ventricular tachycardia.

K22463_C007.indd 225

225

event monitor may increase the likelihood of arrhythmia
detection in cases where an arrhythmia is not detected on
initial evaluation. Although ARVC is a primary myocardial disease, structural changes may only be present on
histopathology and not be evident on echocardiography.
The expected findings on echocardiography vary depending on the stage of disease progression. The majority of
asymptomatic Boxers, as well as most dogs suffering
from syncopal episodes, have normal echocardiograms,
but signs of depressed ventricular function and chamber dilation are reported on occasion. Atrial enlargement
also develops as a result of ventricular dysfunction, and
is more pronounced in dogs with CHF. Ultimately, disease
progression may lead to biventricular failure, making it
difficult to distinguish ARVC from idiopathic DCM.

Management
Treatment of ARVC aims at alleviating the clinical signs,
as there is no specific treatment for the disease. In the
absence of clinical signs and if the arrhythmia burden
is mild, no treatment may be necessary. However, if the
arrhythmia is of clinical concern or if there are collapsing episodes, antiarrhythmic therapy is implemented.
In dogs, common protocols for the treatment of ventricular arrhythmias include the use of sotalol monotherapy
or a combination of mexiletine and a beta-blocker. The
response to antiarrhythmic therapy should be assessed
via 24-hour Holter monitoring, since a large daily variation in the number of ventricular arrhythmias may
be seen in dogs with ARVC. In cases where CHF is present, standard heart failure therapy is initiated with the
need for addition of antiarrhythmic therapy determined
by the patient’s underlying rhythm. Administration of
antiarrhythmic drugs can lead to a reduction in clinical
signs and therefore improve quality of life, but the risk
for sudden death from ARVC is not decreased by these
medications.

Prognosis
ARVC progresses over several years and the rate of progression varies between dogs. In dogs with severe arrhythmia or syncope but normal cardiac function, a 2–3-year
survival is not unusual when the clinical signs are controlled with antiarrhythmic therapy. Survival is usually
less than 1 year once myocardial failure and CHF occur.

HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
Definition/overview
HCM is a rare primary myocardial disease in dogs. It
is characterized by concentric hypertrophy of the left

23/04/16 1:06 pm

226

Diseases of specific organ systems

ventricle in the absence of a reason for the hypertrophy. Therefore, the diagnosis excludes valvular stenosis,
hypertension, or other systemic illness that may stimulate left ventricular hypertrophy.

Clinical presentation
Most dogs with HCM are males and most are diagnosed
before 3 years of age. In humans and cats with HCM,
asymmetrical hypertrophy of the left ventricle is seen;
however, dogs with HCM more commonly have symmetrical hypertrophy of the left ventricle. The vast majority
of dogs also have systolic anterior motion of the mitral
valve causing dynamic left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction (LVOTO). Some dogs may have myocardial
hypertrophy as a result of the LVOTO and not because of
a primary myocardial disorder such as HCM. Concurrent
abnormalities of the mitral valve have been described
in patients with HCM and LVOTO. In addition, treatment
with beta-blockers causes significant reduction of the
LVOTO and may lead to improvement or resolution of the
hypertrophy in some cases.

Differential diagnosis
Rule out systemic hypertension and other causes of
increased afterload, such as SAS. Infiltrative myocardial
disease, in particular lymphoma, may be responsible for
concentric ventricular hypertrophy.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis relies on an echocardiogram to demonstrate
left ventricular concentric hypertrophy in the absence
of an obstruction to ejection of blood in the aorta or systemic hypertension.

Management
Treatment is primarily aimed at reducing or e­ liminating
the LVOTO with beta-blockers (e.g. atenolol: 1 mg/kg
q12–24h), which slow the heart rate and decrease
contractility.

Prognosis
In most of the described cases, HCM was a fatal disease.
The primary concern in these dogs is sudden death; less
commonly, dogs may develop CHF secondary to diastolic
dysfunction and severe left atrial enlargement.

INFILTRATIVE DISEASE
Definition/overview
Infiltrative myocardial disease is infrequent in dogs. The
most commonly seen cause is a cardiac tumor. Infiltration

K22463_C007.indd 226

by a tumor to the degree that it impairs myocardial
­diastolic or systolic function is rare.

Etiology
Lymphosarcoma is usually suspected. Lapland dogs have
been reported to develop myocardial infiltration with
glycogen, secondary to glycogen storage disease. These
dogs had clinical signs associated with skeletal muscle
disease; however, arrhythmias were also noted.

Clinical presentation
Most often dogs will present with clinical signs related to
cardiac arrhythmia, pericardial effusion and, on occasion,
obstruction to blood flow by the cardiac tumor.

Differential diagnosis
The degree of infiltration of the myocardium can be
severe enough to resemble HCM.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on a detailed echocardiographic exam­
ination. If pericardial effusion is present, a sample
should be obtained via pericardiocentesis and submitted for cytologic evaluation. An abdominal ultrasound
and fine-needle aspirates of enlarged organs and lymph
nodes may help reach the diagnosis of lymphoma.

Management
Treatment is aimed at addressing the underlying cause
for the myocardial infiltration and the use of antiarrhythmic medication determined by the underlying rhythm.

Prognosis
If cardiac lymphoma is diagnosed, survival depends on
response to chemotherapy, with some dogs living more
than 6 months after diagnosis.

FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHY
Definition/overview
Cardiomyopathies are diseases of the myocardium
­associated with cardiac dysfunction and are the most common form of cardiac disease in felines. HCM is a
­ ssociated
with increased cardiac mass due to a hypertrophied,
­nondilated left ventricle in the absence of a hemodynamic
load or metabolic cause. It is the most common form of cardiomyopathy in felines (60% of cases) with a higher prevalence in c­ ertain breeds (Maine Coon, Ragdoll, Norwegian
Forest Cat, British Shorthair, American Shorthair, Sphynx,
Siberian, and Persian), although Domestic Shorthairs are
seen most commonly. Males are predisposed (65–70% of

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

cases) possibly related to ­co-modifying genes or ­hormonal
­influences. Prevalence within the feline population has
been reported as between 8% and 15%, although the
­criteria for diagnosis vary between studies and prevalence may be higher in some breeds.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) is defined as restricted
filling and reduced diastolic volume of one or both ventricles
with normal or reduced systolic ­function and normal wall
thickness. It is the second most ­associated with common
form of cardiomyopathy (20% of cases). DCM is associated
with dilation and impaired contractility of the left ventricle
or both ventricles. Arrhythmogenic ­cardiomyopathy (ACM) is
characterized by progressive fibro-fatty replacement of the
myocardium that is regional or global, leading to a dilated
and hypocontractile right ventricle with various arrhythmias and conduction abnormalities. It may also affect the
left ventricle. Unclassified cardiomyopathy is diagnosed
when there is echocardiographic myocardial disease that
does not readily fit into other c­ ategories of cardiac disease.

Etiology
Familial HCM has been documented in Maine Coon cats
as an autosomal dominant trait with incomplete penetrance, and a similar pattern of inheritance is suspected
for other breeds. Separate mutations in different regions
of the myosin binding protein C (MyBPC3) gene are considered causative of HCM in both Maine Coon and Ragdoll
breeds. Importantly, these mutations have not been identified in other breeds, and it is likely that other mutations
in this gene or in genes for other sarcomeric proteins
exist, but have not yet been discovered. Over 1,400 mutations in 27 genes coding for sarcomeric or other structural
proteins have been identified in humans with HCM. In
humans, there is a correlation for some genes between
the location of the mutation, severity of hypertrophy,
and incidence of sudden death. Development of the HCM
phenotype is not an inevitable consequence in individuals with an HCM genotype, as there is a low penetrance
for the MyBPC3 mutation and it is likely age related.
Additionally, co-modifier genes and environmental influences may affect phenotypic expression.
Myocardial hypertrophy can occur secondary to
­pressure overload (outflow obstruction, systemic hypertension), hyperthyroidism, hypersomatotropism, and
infiltrative diseases of the myocardium. These causes
should be excluded as soon as possible before a diagnosis
of HCM is made.
The other forms of cardiomyopathy (RCM, DCM, ACM) are
idiopathic and likely have a genetic basis. DCM was historically due to a taurine deficient diet and is now rare due
to supplementation in commercial diets. Current cases of

K22463_C007.indd 227

227

DCM may be found in feline patients on nontraditional
diets (vegetarian diet or being fed canine food). RCM and
ACM may be associated with an inflammatory process
secondary to infectious, neoplastic, or immune-mediated
disorders.

Pathophysiology
In HCM, it is hypothesized that the production of abnormal
sarcomeric proteins creates a functional defect in the process of muscle contraction, leading to increased m
­ yocyte
stress with subsequent activation of trophic factors (angiotensin II, aldosterone, insulin-like growth factor) that induce
myocyte hypertrophy. Diastolic dysfunction is the primary
mechanism responsible for c­ linical manifestations in HCM
and RCM. Hypertrophy of the left ventricle wall (HCM)
causes impaired or delayed relaxation and interstitial/
endomyocardial fibrosis (HCM and RCM) increases myocardial stiffness and reduces distensibility. These changes
impair left ventriclular filling and result in filling only at
higher pressures. Elevated filling pressures inevitably lead
to left atrial ­enlargement, p
­ ulmonary venous hypertension,
and CHF. (See Congestive heart ­failure, Pathophysiology, for
further discussion of neurohormonal activation.)
HCM generally leads to normal or increased global
systolic performance of the left ventricle; however,
regional systolic impairment has been documented in
HCM patients using tissue Doppler imaging. Systolic dysfunction may be present in any myocardial disease due
to ischemia and replacement fibrosis. Regional systolic
impairment may increase regional wall stress and stimulate myocardial hypertrophy. DCM results in left ventricular or biventricular systolic dysfunction. ACM affects
systolic performance primarily of the right ventricle and
leads to a dilated, thin-walled, hypokinetic right ventricle and may affect the left ventricle. Tachyarrhythmias
can affect diastolic performance and lead to myocardial
dysfunction. Unclassified cardiomyopathy may show
­evidence of systolic or diastolic dysfunction.

Clinical presentation
Most cats with cardiomyopathy are diagnosed at a mean
age of 5–7 years (range 3 months to 18 years), and HCM is
typically diagnosed at an earlier age than other forms of
cardiomyopathy. Certain breeds may present more commonly at a younger age. They may be presented in the
asymptomatic phase due to the presence of auscultatory
abnormalities such as a heart murmur or gallop sound.
Various prevalence studies have shown that nearly 50%
of apparently healthy cats with heart murmurs do not
have evidence of cardiac disease; however, the presence
of a heart murmur warrants further evaluation. In one

23/04/16 1:06 pm

228

Diseases of specific organ systems

study, 70% of cats with HCM did not have auscultatory
abnormalities, so the absence of these findings does not
exclude the presence of cardiac disease. Cats with occult
cardiomyopathy (more common for RCM, DCM, ACM,
unclassified cardiomyopathy) are often not identified
until clinical signs are present, including dyspnea, tachypnea, lethargy, poor appetite, hindlimb paresis, collapse,
or sudden death. Clinical signs are not an inevitable consequence for individuals with HCM.

Differential diagnosis
Includes cardiomyopathy secondary to systemic disease
(hypertension, hyperthyroidism, hypersomatotropism),
degenerative valve disease, congenital heart disease, and
myocarditis. Differentials for respiratory signs include
feline lower airway disease (feline asthma), pneumonia,
noncardiogenic pleural effusion or pulmonary edema,
hemorrhage, and PTE.

Diagnosis
Echocardiography is the gold standard for diagnosis and
is an excellent noninvasive test that permits evaluation
of morphologic and functional abnormalities of cardiac
structures. Diagnosis of HCM is based on the ­identification
of a diastolic wall thickness >6 mm on 2-dimensional or
M-mode echo. Hypertrophy may be diffuse or segmental
and may be symmetric or asymmetric (Figure 7.40). Other
findings on echo may include papillary muscle hypertrophy, ­end-systolic cavity obliteration, left atrial enlargement
(identified as left atrial dimension >16 mm or indexed to
the aorta, LA/Ao >1.5). HCM may uncommonly affect the

right ventricle. There is a subset of patients with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy due to obstruction in the
left ventriclular outflow tract associated with systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve (Figure 7.41). It is unclear if
the obstruction leads to hypertrophy of the left ventricle or
if obstruction is the result of abnormalities in left ventricular geometry, the mitral valve apparatus, or loading conditions associated with hypertrophy of the left ventricle.
Thoracic radiographs may identify cardiomegaly,
although it may be subtle especially if atrial enlargement is
not present or the primary abnormality is concentric ventricular hypertrophy. The classic valentine shape results
from severe biatrial enlargement. Pulmonary venous congestion, a patchy or diffuse interstitial to alveolar pattern,
and/or pleural effusion are present in cats with CHF.
ECG may show chamber enlargement patterns,
although these are not sensitive findings. Various
arrhythmias and conduction abnormalities may be present. A left anterior fascicular block is the most common
finding in cats with HCM (Figure 7.42). Supraventricular
tachycardia and, rarely, AF may be present in cats secondary to severe atrial enlargement.
The sensitivity of an elevated NT-proBNP for identification of subclinical HCM may be up to 94% or higher,
although its value as a screening test is still uncertain. It
has been shown to discriminate between cats with respiratory signs due to CHF and cats with primary respiratory
disease. An elevated NT-proBNP warrants further diagnostic evaluation. A normal value should not be used to
rule out cardiac disease if other findings are supportive.
7.41

7.40

IVS

LV

PM

Figure 7.40 Right parasternal short-axis echocardiographic
view from a cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. There is
concentric hypertrophy of the interventricular septum and the
left ventricular free wall. The papillary muscles are prominent.
IVS, interventricular septum; PM, papillary muscle.

K22463_C007.indd 228

LA

Figure 7.41 Color Doppler from a cat with hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy showing two areas of turbulence:
one in the left ventricular outflow tract caused by the septal
leaflet of the mitral valve (long arrow); the other in the left
atrium corresponds to a small amount of mitral regurgitation
resulting from the incomplete closure of the mitral valve in
systole (short arrow). LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

7.42

I

II

III

a VR

a VL

a VF

Figure 7.42 ECG from a cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
showing a sinus rhythm with a left axis deviation (lead I mostly
positive, lead aVF mostly negative), also called left anterior
fascicular block.

cTnI may also be elevated in cats with moderate to severe
HCM with or without CHF.
Genetic testing for a specific genetic mutation is currently only available for Maine Coon and Ragdoll cats.
These tests are most useful for identifying breeding cats

229

that carry this mutation to assist in breeding recommendations, although cats that do not carry the mutation may
still develop HCM. Due to the inability of echocardiography
to determine the genotype, genetic testing should be utilized in addition to echocardiographic screening in breeding cats to avoid the production of individuals homozygous
for the mutation.

Management
Standard therapy for feline patients with CHF includes
administration of furosemide and an ACE inhibitor
(Table 7.13). Patients with respiratory signs should receive
supplemental oxygen, and mild sedatives may reduce
­
stress associated with dyspnea. Pimobendan may be
included if there is echocardiographic evidence of systolic
dysfunction. Appropriate management of arrhythmias is
important (see Arrhythmias, Management, for specific recommendations). Prevention of thromboembolic complications with antithrombotics (clopidogrel) is appropriate
for cats at risk for this complication or those presenting
with signs of arterial thromboembolism (Figure 7.43). It is
important to monitor renal values and electrolyte disturbances during treatment of CHF. Hypotension, hypothermia, and bradycardia are not uncommon in patients with
CHF at presentation or during treatment and cats should
be monitored for their occurrence.
Currently, there is no evidence that treatment with various medications (beta-blocker, calcium channel blocker,
ACE inhibitor, or spironolactone) in asymptomatic HCM
patients alters the progression of the disease or delays
the time to development of heart failure. Anecdotally,
some cats with severe left ventricular outflow obstruction due to systolic anterior motion may clinically benefit
from administration of a beta-blocker (atenolol); however, it has not been shown to significantly alter outcome
or long-term prognosis.

Table 7.13 Drugs used in the management of cardiomyopathy in cats.
Drug

Dosage

Comment

Atenolol

0.5–2 mg/kg PO q12–24h

In cats with dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.
Consider long-term treatment if improvement of hypertrophy.
Start with low dose and increase slowly over a few weeks

Enalapril, benazepril

0.25–0.5 mg/kg PO q12–24h

Start q24h

Furosemide

1–2 mg/kg IM or IV q1–8h
1–3 mg/kg PO q8–24h

Monitor blood potassium concentration

Pimobendan

0.25 mg/kg PO q12h

Only when low-output failure confirmed by echocardiography

Clopidogrel

18.75 mg PO q24h

In cats after episode of thromboembolism, or if severe left
atrial enlargement +/- visible thrombus

K22463_C007.indd 229

23/04/16 1:06 pm

230

Diseases of specific organ systems

7.43
RA
LA
Thr

Figure 7.43 Right parasternal echocardiographic view of a cat
showing a large thrombus in the left atrium. LA, left atrium; RA,
right atrium; Thr, thrombus.

Prognosis
Prognosis for cats with HCM is variable. Asymptomatic
patients may live several years after diagnosis and there
are a modest number of felines with mild HCM that do not
experience disease progression and live a normal life span.
Other cats have a more aggressive form of the disease and
die suddenly at a young age, develop CHF, or ­suffer thromboembolic complications. Extreme h
­ ypertrophy (>9 mm),
decreased left ventricular systolic function (FS <30%), and
decreased left atrial systolic function (↓ left atrial FS%)
are associated with increasing risk of cardiac death.
In acute CHF, there is an approximate 80% survival to
discharge. Patients with systolic dysfunction and CHF have
historically had a poor prognosis; however, there may be
improved survival with the addition of p
­ imobendan. The
prognosis from the first episode of heart failure is generally 6–12 months among the various cardiomyopathies;
however, it is quite variable with some patients having
shorter survival and others surviving well beyond 1 year
(some up to 2–3 years). Cats with thromboembolic complications generally have a poor long-term prognosis, with
an average survival of 6 months and up to 30% ­mortality
during the immediate hospitalization period; however,
some cats live for several years.

MYOCARDITIS
Definition/overview
Myocarditis is defined as an inflammation of the
­myocardium associated with myocyte necrosis. Although
myocardial inflammation is present in all forms of ­cardiac
disease, the term myocarditis is reserved for inflammation of the heart as the result of pathogens (viruses,

K22463_C007.indd 230

bacteria, parasites), drug exposure, or i­ mmune-mediated
diseases. The expression traumatic myocarditis is
also used for inflammation of the myocardium after a
mechanical trauma.

Etiology
Myocarditis in dogs (Table 7.14) and cats (Table 7.15)
may be secondary to pathogens (viruses, bacteria,
parasites), immune-mediated diseases, drug toxicity,
­
or trauma. Trypanosoma cruzi (Chagas disease) is one of
the ­
pathogens most commonly recognized as a cause
of ­
myocarditis in endemic areas (particularly in the
­southern part of North America).
In cats, transmissible myocarditis–diaphragmitis is
reported to affect adult cats in California and Florida
during the summer months. Although infectious agents
are thought to be involved (Bartonella henselae, virus),
the cause of this contagious disease remains unknown.
Unfortunately, identifying the cause of myocarditis
remains unsuccessful most of the time.

Pathophysiology
Myocardial lesions can be a direct effect of infectious
agents or drugs, but they can also be secondary to an
immune response. Viruses can enter myocytes and interfere with cell metabolism, which may induce cell death,
Table 7.14 Etiology of canine myocarditis.
Infectious:
•• Bacteria:
○○ Bartonella vinsonii ssp. berkhoffi
○○ Bacillus piliformis
○○ Citrobacter koseri
○○ Borrelia burgdorferi
•• Viruses:
○○ West Nile virus
○○ Adenovirus type 1
○○ Parvovirus
○○ Canine herpesvirus
○○ Canine distemper virus
•• Parasites:
○○ Trypanosoma cruzi (Chagas disease)
○○ Leishmaniasis
○○ Neospora caninum
○○ Babesia
○○ Toxocara canis
○○ Fungal disease: blastomycosis, cryptococcosis,
­coccidiodomycosis, aspergillosis
Immune-mediated:
•• Lymphocytic nonsuppurative myocarditis
•• Myocarditis associated with polymyositis
Drug reaction:
•• Anthracyclines: doxorubicin

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

Table 7.15 Etiology of feline myocarditis.
Infectious:
•• Bacteria:
○○ Bartonella henselae
○○ Other bacteria
•• Viruses:
○○ Parvovirus (panleukopenia virus)
○○ Other virus: herpes or calicivirus
•• Parasites:
○○ Toxoplasma gondii
Immune-mediated:
•• Eosinophilic syndrome
Drug reaction:
•• Anesthesia
Unknown:
•• Transmissible myocarditis–diaphragmitis of cats

­hypertrophy, or dysfunction. By ­modifying the myocyte
cytoskeleton, viruses can lead to ­cardiac ­dysfunction with
echocardiographic ­characteristics of DCM. The immune
response can lead to cytokine release and enzyme
­activation. During the i­nflammatory process, activated
­collagenase and elastase enzymes c­ ontribute to cardiac
remodeling. Activation of specific ­cytokines, ­especially
transforming growth ­
factor-beta, may ­
predispose
to pathologic fibrosis.
Chagas disease, also called American t­ rypanosomiasis,
is due to Trypanosoma cruzi infection. The p
­ referential
sites for reproduction in the host are the muscles,
especially the myocardium (Figure 7.44). This tro­
pism explains why myocarditis is the hallmark of
the d
­isease. Trypomastigotes can penetrate into the
blood if the feces of the vector bug (Triatoma sp. – ‘kissing bug’) are deposited close to the bite or if the host
ingests a r­eservoir host (armadillo, opossum, raccoon,
mouse, squirrel, rat). Once in the cardiac muscle, trypomastigotes multiply and are released by cell rupture
(Figure 7.45). This step corresponds to the acute phase
of the ­disease (0–4 weeks after infection) and the peak
of clinical signs. After the acute phase, the clinical signs
decrease or ­
disappear and the healing process mediated by the immune ­system induces cardiac remodeling (myocardial n
­ ecrosis, ­fibrosis, coronary spasm). The
onset of the chronic stage may appear several months
to several years post i­noculation. Progressive cardiac
­remodeling leads to systolic ­dysfunction, arrhythmias
(most commonly s­ econd- or third-degree AV block, but
ventricular t­achyarrhythmias are also reported) and
possibly CHF.

K22463_C007.indd 231

231

7.44

Metacyclic
trypomastigotes in feces

Infective trypomastigotes
become epimastigotes for
replication in vector’s gut

Infection when fecal
material is close to the bug
bite or a wound

Vector infection during
blood feeding

Trypomastigotes in the
blood of the host

The parasites spread to
many organs but cardiac
and skeletal muscles are
preferred for replication

Amastigote mature in
infective trypomastigotes

Replicating amastigotes in
cardiac and skeletal muscle

Figure 7.44 Life cycle of Trypanosoma cruzi. The green boxes
represent the vector period; the blue boxes represent the host
period.
7.45

Figure 7.45 Histologic section of a canine heart. Infrequently,
cardiomyocytes are expanded by protozoal pseudocysts
(arrow) that contain numerous amastigotes. H&E stain.
Magnification ×40.

Clinical presentation
Myocarditis can affect dogs and cats of all ages. However,
several diseases are more likely in the young dog (Chagas
disease, parvovirus) or in immunocompromised animals
(e.g. leishmaniasis, toxoplasmosis). Obtaining a complete
history is essential because living conditions or travel to
endemic area may help the clinician identify an etiologic
factor for a specific disease.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

232

Diseases of specific organ systems

Dogs and cats with myocarditis are usually presented
for weakness, syncope, exercise intolerance, respiratory
difficulties, and/or abdominal distension. Clinical signs
are most commonly acute but these signs can be insidious (e.g. chronic phase of Chagas disease). Fever and
leukocytosis are unusual findings. Complex arrhythmias
are ­frequent and should alert the clinician to the possibility of myocarditis when they occur in a breed that is
not predisposed for cardiomyopathy. Tachyarrhythmias
(ventricular or supraventricular) and bradyarrhythmias
(most commonly second- or third-degree AV block) are
reported. A low-grade left apical systolic heart murmur
or a gallop rhythm can be auscultated in the presence
of severe left ventricular enlargement and systolic dysfunction. Left- and right-sided CHF are complications of
myocarditis.

Differential diagnosis
Myocarditis is characterized by nonspecific clinical signs,
therefore differential diagnoses include other cardiac diseases and other cause of arrhythmias.
When the myocarditis is associated with both systolic
dysfunction and ventricular and/or supraventricular
arrhythmias, the differential diagnosis should include
DCM, tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy, and infiltrative cardiomyopathy (e.g. lymphoma). However, myocarditis is usually acute compared with other causes of
systolic dysfunction.
It is suspected that in cats as in humans, myocarditis may also lead to myocardial concentric hypertrophy.
Differential diagnosis for feline ventricular hypertrophy includes HCM, systemic hypertension, hyperthyroidism, acromegaly, muscular dystrophy, myocarditis, and
cardiac lymphoma. Therefore, the differential diagnosis of myocarditis in cats should include all causes of
ventricular hypertrophy and other cardiomyopathies
­
(ACM, RCM, DCM).

Diagnosis
Myocarditis is usually suspected in dogs and cats
­(especially in young animals) with acute clinical signs
consistent with arrhythmias and systolic dysfunction.
A complete biochemistry profile and hemogram are
­necessary to assess organ dysfunction, inflammation, or
the presence of blood parasites.
In all dogs and cats with suspected myocarditis, an ECG
(+/- Holter recording) should be performed, especially if
arrhythmias are detected during physical examination
or if the reason for the consultation includes weakness,
exercise intolerance, or syncope. A complete echocardiogram is essential to exclude other cardiac diseases and

K22463_C007.indd 232

to evaluate systolic function. cTnI serum level increases
­secondary to massive myocardial cell death. A marked
elevation in circulating cTNI level is common with
myocarditis.
Thoracic radiography is indicated if respiratory signs
are present to evaluate the possibility of pulmonary
edema or pleural effusion. Any pleural or abdominal
­fluids removed should be submitted for bacterial culture
and cytology. Any accessible lesions should be aspirated
or biopsied for analysis.
Diagnosis of Chagas disease can be made by direct
observation of Trypanosoma cruzi on a stained blood
smear or buffy coat smear, on lymph node aspirates
or in abdominal effusion. PCR is sensitive in the acute
phase but the sensitivity decreases with chronicity. Antibody titer is usually positive by 3 weeks post
­infection. The most commonly used serologic tests are
the indirect immunofluorescent antibody test and the
ELISA test (possible cross reaction with Leishmania).
Radioimmunoprecipitation assays, indirect hemagglutination assays, and flow cytometry are used for research
purposes.

Management
Treatment should be directed at improving cardiac
function, decreasing arrhythmia burden, controlling
­
CHF, and treating the cause if possible. Inotropes are
indicated to improve systolic dysfunction; pimobendan
is probably the most effective oral inotrope. In combination with diuretics (especially furosemide), it helps
to ­
control CHF. Abdominocentesis and thoracocentesis
should be ­performed in all dogs and cats with ascites or
pleural effusion. High-grade second- and third-degree AV
blocks do not respond to medical treatment, therefore
pacemaker implantation is needed to increase the heart
rate and improve cardiac output. Tachyarrhythmias are
treated according to the underlying mechanism involved
(see Tachyarrhythmias).
No effective treatment is currently available to treat
Chagas disease in dogs. Nifurtimox and benznidazole
are reserved for human use only. Albaconazole has been
shown to reduce parasite proliferation but not totally
eliminate the parasite. Ketoconazole, gossypol, and allopurinol have not shown sufficient efficacy. Prednisolone
(0.5–1 mg/kg PO q12–24h) may increase survival. Because
the immune system is involved in the mechanism of myocardial lesions even in infectious myocarditis, glucocorticoids are often recommended to reduce inflammation.
Antibiotics can be effective against bacterial myocarditis and the choice should ideally be made on the basis of
blood culture results.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

Prognosis
Prognosis is usually guarded and unpredictable. Chagas
disease is usually associated with poor outcomes because
even if a dog survives the acute phase, the chronic phase
may induce severe cardiac dysfunction. Young dogs have
a worse prognosis (<5 months survival) than adult or
old dogs (30–60 months survival), probably because of a
­different immune response to the disease.
Most of the time, puppies that develop myocarditis secondary to parvovirus die in a few days because
of severe myocardial necrosis. However, myocarditis
can also resolve in a few days or a few weeks without
specific treatment. Some authors report that cats may
develop ­
myocardial hypertrophy and CHF ­
secondary
to ­
anesthesia or surgery and occasionally recover
spontaneously.

PERICARDIAL DISEASES
Definition/overview
The most common manifestation of pericardial disease is
pericardial effusion. Cardiac tamponade describes pericardial effusion associated with clinical signs because a
large volume of effusion is present or because fluid has
accumulated very fast. Constrictive pericarditis is caused
by a markedly thickened pericardial sac that prevents
adequate cardiac filling.

Etiology
Pericardial effusion in dogs is frequently caused by
cardiac tumors. Cardiac hemangiosarcoma is the most
common tumor responsible for cardiac tamponade.
Golden Retrievers and German Shepherd Dogs are overrepresented. Brachycephalic breeds are predisposed to
chemodectoma. Other tumors include mesothelioma,
lymphoma, and ectopic thyroid carcinoma. Idiopathic
pericardial effusion is another common cause of cardiac tamponade. Unusual causes for tamponade include
trauma, coagulation disorders, and an atrial tear in dogs
with severe mitral valve regurgitation and a dilated left
atrium. Pericardial effusion is less common in cats and is
usually associated with CHF. Tamponade is rare in cats,
but could result from lymphosarcoma or feline infectious
peritonitis (FIP). Constrictive pericarditis can be a complication of any chronic effusion or pericarditis. It has
been described as a complication of Coccidioides immitis
infections.

Pathophysiology
Pericardial fluid has little effect on cardiac function
unless the intrapericardial pressure equals or exceeds

K22463_C007.indd 233

233

cardiac diastolic pressure. The pericardium can accom­
modate a moderate amount of fluid that a
­ccumulates
slowly with little change in pericardial pressure. However,
large amounts of fluid, or even small amounts that accumulate quickly (hemorrhage), can cause a significant
increase in pericardial pressure leading to cardiac tamponade. Tamponade impedes diastolic filling. As a result,
cardiac output falls. When pericardial fluid accumulates
over days or weeks, this decrease in cardiac output results
in an activation of the adrenergic tone and neurohormonal
mechanisms. This includes activation of the RAAS, leading
to increased angiotensin II, aldosterone, and vasopressin.
This results is an increase in heart rate and fluid retention. Renal fluid excretion is not promoted because there
is no increase in secretion of atrial natriuretic peptide.
Over time, right-sided CHF occur. Conversely, when hemorrhagic pericardial effusion accumulates within a few
seconds, there is no time for water retention to occur and
prevent a rapid drop in cardiac filling and, subsequently,
an important reduction in cardiac output. Cardiogenic
shock is therefore the typical consequence of acute cardiac
tamponade. Reduced coronary perfusion during tamponade can also impair ­ventricular systolic function.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of cardiac tamponade are consistent with
right-sided CHF and reduced cardiac output. History may
include weakness, lethargy, exercise intolerance, collapse,
syncope, abdominal distension, and tachypnea, as well
as weight loss in chronic cases. Signs of right-sided CHF
predominate. Physical examination may reveal jugular
vein distension, weak femoral pulses, and muffled heart
sounds (Beck’s triad). Also a positive hepatojugular reflux,
hepatomegaly, ascites, tachypnea, and dyspnea can be
present. Pleural effusion from right-sided CHF may also
muffle heart sounds and lung sounds ventrally. Sinus
tachycardia, pale mucous membranes, and prolonged CRT
are common due to increased sympathetic tone. A murmur may be present if there is underlying cardiac disease; however, pericardial effusion will not cause a heart
murmur on its own. Pulsus paradoxus is not always present but is characteristic of pericardial effusion. It results
in weaker femoral pulses during inspiration and stronger
pulses during expiration.

Differential diagnosis
Congenital causes of canine pericardial disease include
pericardial cysts, partial/total pericardial agenesis, and
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia (PPDH).
PPDH is the most common congenital pericardial disease in cats. Causes of acquired pericardial disease and

23/04/16 1:06 pm

234

Diseases of specific organ systems

7.47

pericardial effusion in dogs include: hemangiosarcoma,
heart base tumor, idiopathic pericardial effusion, malignant mesothelioma, hypoalbuminemia, uremia, CHF,
septic pericarditis (bacterial, fungal [coccidiomycosis],
protozoal [leishmaniasis]), left atrial rupture, trauma,
and hemorrhage (coagulopathy). Causes of acquired
­pericardial disease in cats include: CHF, FIP, hypoalbuminemia, idiopathic, and lymphosarcoma.

RA

LV

Diagnosis
Radiography
Radiographic findings are not always reliable for diagnosing pericardial effusion. The typical, large, globoid
cardiac silhouette results when there is a moderate
­accumulation of chronic effusion. Acute effusions causing
clinical signs of cardiac tamponade may not always be
evident on a chest radiograph.
Radiographs of animals with PPDH show convergence
of the cardiac silhouette and the diaphragm. GI segments
may be evident as gas opacities within the pericardial
space and, depending on the amount of organ displacement, the abdomen may be partially devoid of intestinal
segments or other organs. Liver and omental fat are most
commonly herniated through the defect. Sternal defects
are often found concurrently with PPDH. Other congenital cardiovascular defects have also been reported in dogs
and cats with PPDH.

Electrocardiography
Animals with cardiac tamponade are tachycardic. In
addition, low amplitude QRS complexes are common in
animals with a moderate amount of pericardial ­effusion.
Electrical alternans (a beat-to-beat variation in the
R wave amplitude) is less common (Figure 7.46).

Echocardiography
Two-dimensional echocardiography is the most sensitive,
noninvasive test for confirming the presence of pericardial
effusion and elucidating the cause. Pericardial effusion is
seen as an anechoic space between the epicardium and
pericardium (Figure 7.47). The amount of effusion can be
roughly quantitated and signs of cardiac tamponade can

PE

Figure 7.47 Echocardiographic view from a dog with
pericardial effusion. The effusion is seen as an anechoic space
around the heart. LV, left ventricle; PE, pericardial effusion;
RA, right atrium.

be identified. The areas of the right atrium/auricle, heart
base, and main pulmonary artery should be examined
carefully since these are common locations for cardiac
masses (Figure 7.48). The specific tumor type can often be
predetermined based on location. Overall, echocardiography is estimated to be 90% sensitive for detecting cardiac
masses. Heart base tumors are commonly found adjacent
to the aorta on standard transthoracic views. Right atrial/
auricular masses (commonly hemangiosarcoma) may be
difficult to see, so the absence of a mass in this location
does not necessarily rule it out. Transesophageal echocardiography may more easily reveal these masses, but
this technique requires special equipment and general
anesthesia. False-positive fi
­ ndings have been reported,
and normal cardiac structures can be misidentifed as a
mass when imaged in oblique positions, especially by
inexperienced echocardiographers. In cases of cardiac
tamponade, the v
­ entricular walls may show pseudohypertrophy due to external compression and collapse of
the right atrial and ventricular walls during diastole. The
myocardial ­texture should be observed for any signs of

II

7.46

Figure 7.46 ECG (lead II) from a dog with cardiac tamponade. There is sinus tachycardia with a beat-to-beat variation in QRS
complex amplitude, called electrical alternans.

K22463_C007.indd 234

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

7.48

Mass

LV

LA

235

catheter can be advanced. To distinguish red pericardial fluid from blood within the heart or blood vessels, a
sample of fluid is ­collected in an activated clotting time
tube. Blood should normally clot within 60–90 s­ econds,
unlike s­anguineous body ­
cavity effusions in which
clotting ­factors and ­platelets are depleted. Ventricular
arrhythmias are ­
common during this procedure, so
ECG monitoring should be available. The treatment and
prognosis for s­ pecific pericardial ­diseases are described
below.

Hemangiosarcoma

tumor infiltrate (­ primary or metastatic neoplasia such as
lymphoma). In the case of a left atrial tear, a clot may be
visualized in the pericardial space along with the pre-existing ­valvular disease.

Cardiac hemangiosarcoma has usually metastasized
by the time of diagnosis. Commonly, palliation with
pericardiocentesis alone is elected. However, the fluid
­
and ­cardiac tamponade can return quickly and result
in death or euthanasia. Median survival time for
dogs treated with pericardiocentesis alone is approximately 2 weeks. Other aggressive therapies include
tumor ­
resection, ­
pericardectomy, chemotherapy, and
­splenectomy. Some dogs live up to 3–6 months. Adjuvant
­chemotherapy has been shown to provide little survival
advantage.

Pericardial fluid analysis

Heart base tumors

Pericardiocentesis is frequently necessary for emergency stabilization of a patient with pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade; however, fluid analysis is
rarely diagnostic. Fluid samples are often hemorrhagic
or ­
serosanguineous sterile inflammatory exudates.
Not ­
surprisingly, hemangiosarcoma and aortic body
tumors are rarely confirmed on cytologic examination of
­pericardial fluid. Less common causes of pericardial effusion, such as lymphosarcoma or infectious pericarditis, are
more ­reliably diagnosed with pericardial fluid analysis.

Complete surgical resection of these tumors is usually
impractical because they are highly vascular and surround major blood vessels. Palliation with pericardectomy alone commonly results in prolonged survival
with good quality of life, sometimes over 2 years after
pericardectomy.

Figure 7.48 Right parasternal echocardiographic view from a
dog with a large cardiac mass expanding along the right atrium
and ventricle. The mass is so large that it is compressing the
right atrium and ventricle. LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle.

Management/prognosis
Acute management of pericardial effusion requires
­pericardiocentesis in most cases. The pericardium should
be approached from the right side to reduce the risk of
lacerating a coronary vessel. Many animals will tolerate the procedure without sedation, but a sedative such
as butorphanol can be used. The right thorax is clipped
and aseptically prepared. The ideal location for entry
can be determined with ultrasound. Typically, a 14- or
16-gauge over-the-needle catheter is used along with
an extension set and a three-way stop-cock. The skin,
­intercostal muscles, and parietal pleura are infiltrated
with local anesthetic. The catheter is then inserted while
applying negative p
­ ressure. Once the needle enters the
pericardium and fluid flows into the extension set, the

K22463_C007.indd 235

Mesothelioma and other cardiac tumors
There are only a few case reports of successful
treatment for mesothelioma. However, complete
pericardectomy ­
­
followed by intracavitary cisplatin
and IV doxorubicin have been reported to result in a
­disease-free state 2 years later. Patients may also require
periodic ­
­
thoracocentesis for pleural effusion. Since
mesothelioma can be d
­
­ ifficult to diagnose even with
histopathology, accumulation of a large amount of
pleural effusion 4–6 months after ­
­
pericardectomy
increases the s­
uspicion for the disease. Cardiac
­lymphosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and fi
­ brosarcoma
are rare. Cardiac ­
lymphosarcoma is ­
treatable with
chemotherapy.

Infectious pericarditis
Bacterial infections of the pericardium are thought to
arise most commonly from foreign body ­
penetration,
often migrating foxtails (Hordeum spp.). Therefore,

23/04/16 1:06 pm

236

Diseases of specific organ systems

pericardectomy and removal of the foreign body is
­
crucial for resolution of the disease. Therapy, includ­
ing pericardectomy, removal of any foreign bodies, and
long-term antibiotic therapy (up to 6 months), results in
a good prognosis. Treatment for coccidioidomycosis is
similar except that antifungal medications replace antibiotics. Prognosis for Coccidioides infection involving
the p
­ ericardium is guarded as ­constrictive pericarditis
is a common complication after the fungal infection is
treated.

Idiopathic pericardial effusion and constrictive
pericarditis
Idiopathic pericardial effusion is a diagnosis of exclusion
and often not completely distinguishable from mesothelioma. Animals with idiopathic pericardial effusion can
develop effusive–constrictive pericarditis over time with
repeated thoracocentesis. For this reason, pericardectomy
is recommended. Many animals go on to do well after successful surgery.

PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
Definition/overview
PH is defined as elevated blood pressure within the
pulmonary ­
vasculature with a systolic p
­ulmonary
artery ­pressure >30 mmHg, mean pressure >25 mmHg,
or ­diastolic pressure >19 mmHg. Recognition of PH has
increased since the widespread availability of Doppler
echocardiography. It occurs most commonly in ­middle
aged to older, small breed dogs, although it may occur
in any canine patient and is less commonly ­identified
in cats.

Etiology
Primary (idiopathic) PH is uncommon in veterinary
­medicine. PH occurs most commonly s­ econdary to underlying diseases and classification may be based on location (precapillary versus postcapillary) or based on the
­pathophysiologic mechanism (Table 7.16).

Pathophysiology
The pulmonary vasculature is normally a low-pressure
system with minimal resistance and high capacitance
(highly distensible). Prolonged exposure of the vascular bed to significant increases in pulmonary blood flow
occurs with large left-to-right shunting congenital cardiac
defects. Increased flow causes vascular endothelial damage, vasoconstriction, and remodeling of small pulmonary arteries leading to the development of PH and may
cause irreversible damage to the pulmonary vasculature.

K22463_C007.indd 236

Table 7.16 Etiology of pulmonary hypertension.
Pulmonary hypertension secondary to increased blood flow
(congenital intra- or extracardiac systemic-to-pulmonary
shunts):
•• Atrial septal defect
•• Ventricular septal defect
•• Patent ductus arteriosus
Postcapillary (pulmonary venous hypertension):
•• Mitral valve disease
•• Myocardial disease
•• Miscellaneous left-sided heart diseases
Precapillary:
•• Pulmonary arterial hypertension with pulmonary disease
or hypoxia:
○○ Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
○○ Interstitial pulmonary fibrosis
○○ Neoplasia
○○ High-altitude disease
○○ Reactive pulmonary artery vasoconstriction
(e.g. hypoxia due to pulmonary edema)
•• Pulmonary arterial hypertension due to vascular
­obstruction or destruction:
○○ Thromboembolism (immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, neoplasia, cardiac disease, protein-losing disease,
hyperadrenocorticism, sepsis, trauma, recent surgery)
○○ Heartworm disease
○○ Necrotizing vasculitis/arteritis
○○ Idiopathic
Miscellaneous:
•• Compressive mass lesions (neoplasia, granuloma)

Postcapillary (venous) PH occurs with left-sided cardiac
diseases (e.g. mitral valve insufficiency, DCM). Increased
filling pressure impedes drainage of the pulmonary cap­
illaries and leads to a compensatory increase in pulmonary artery pressure to maintain forward blood flow. This
is the most common cause of PH and tends to be mild to
moderate. Hypoxic pulmonary artery v
­ asoconstriction may
worsen PH if pulmonary edema is present. Precapillary
PH occurs from obstruction or destruction of the pulmonary vasculature or narrowing of the vessels without
physical obstruction. Physical obstruction or destruction
occurs with PTE, heartworm disease, or obliterative endarteritis. Hypoxemia and release of vasoactive substances
from activated platelets causes reactive vasoconstriction,
further increasing pulmonary vascular resistance. PTE is
underdiagnosed in veterinary patients and is secondary
to a number of disease processes. Hypoxia leads to pulmonary arteriolar constriction as an adaptive mechanism
to shunt pulmonary blood flow to regions of well oxygenated lung tissue. High altitude and chronic lung diseases
cause hypoxic vasoconstriction. Chronic lung diseases

23/04/16 1:06 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

also distort the pulmonary vasculature such that there is
­narrowing of the pulmonary arterioles without causing
physical destruction or obstruction of the vessels.
PH creates a pressure overload on the right ventricle
leading to right heart enlargement, right ventricular
dysfunction, and tricuspid valve insufficiency and may
progress to right-sided CHF. PH may also limit preload
(filling) to the left ventricle, decreasing cardiac output to
the ­systemic circulation.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs and physical examination findings are
­varied and are a result of the underlying primary ­disease
process or due to PH. Presenting clinical signs may include
lethargy, exercise intolerance, cough, dyspnea, tachypnea,
syncope, and cyanosis. Clinical signs may only be present during exercise. Patients with mild to moderate PH
are often asymptomatic. Physical examination findings
may include pulmonary crackles, wheezes, a loud or split
second heart sound, systolic heart murmurs (due to tricuspid or mitral valve insufficiency), diastolic heart murmur (pulmonic insufficiency if severe with PH), v
­ arious
arrhythmias, and a palpable right-sided apex beat. In
dogs, when PH leads to right-sided CHF, ascites is present.

Differential diagnosis
Differentials for respiratory signs include PTE,
pneumonia, CHF, pleural effusion, chronic bronchitis,
­
pulmonary ­
­
hemorrhage or contusions, and lung lobe
torsion. Differentials for syncope or exercise i­ntolerance
include arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, vasovagal ­syncope,
­hypotension, acute pericardial effusion, and anemia.

Diagnosis
The gold standard diagnostic test is right heart catheterization and direct measurement of pulmonary pressures;
however, this technique is impractical in most clinical
situations. Doppler echocardiography is an excellent,
­
noninvasive method of estimating pulmonary pressures
and is considered diagnostic in veterinary medicine. The
velocity of tricuspid valve regurgitation (in the absence
of PS) is used to measure right ventricular end-systolic
pressure (RVESP) to estimate the systolic pulmonary
artery pressures using the modified Bernoulli equation (P = 4v2) where P is the pressure gradient (between
right ventricle and right atrium) and v is the velocity of
the regurgitant jet (Figure 7.49). Pulmonic valve insufficiency may be used to estimate diastolic pulmonary
artery ­pressure (PAP). Based on systolic pressure, PH is
­classified as mild (RVESP 36–60 mmHg, estimated PAP
40–65 mmHg), ­moderate (RVESP 60–80 mmHg, estimated

K22463_C007.indd 237

237

PAP 65–90 mmHg), or severe (RVESP ≥80 mmHg, ­estimated
PAP ≥90 mmHg). Abnormalities on 2-dimensional or
M-mode echocardiography may suggest the presence of
PH, including right ventricular hypertrophy (eccentric
or concentric), right atrial enlargement, flattening of
the interventricular septum (Figure 7.50), paradoxical
­septal motion, and dilation of the main pulmonary artery
(Figure 7.51). These findings are not always present and
PH should not be ruled out if the right heart appears
structurally ­
normal. Other findings based on pulmonary artery systolic flow profiles, right ventricular tissue
Doppler imaging, and systolic time intervals may support
a diagnosis of PH in the absence of direct measurement. If
PH is due to left-sided heart disease, then evidence of significant structural disease should be present. If left heart
disease is absent, the left ventricle may be small and
underfilled.
Additional diagnostics should be performed to identify
an underlying cause and should include a CBC, biochemistry, urinalysis, and thoracic radiographs. Evidence of right
heart enlargement, main pulmonary artery bulge, dilation of lobar pulmonary arteries, or pulmonary disease
may be identified on thoracic radiographs. Radiographic
findings may be suggestive of PH, but are not diagnostic. Further diagnostic testing may be ­indicated based
on the suspected differentials after initial evaluation
and may include arterial blood gas, heartworm antigen
testing, abdominal ultrasound, urine protein:creatinine
ratio, ­fluoroscopy, bronchoscopy, bronchoalveolar lavage,
CT, angiography, and a coagulation profile including
D-dimers and possible thromboelastogram. An ECG may
suggest right heart enlargement, although it is not a sensitive finding. Various ­arrhythmias may be identified.

7.49

Velocity: 4.5 m/sec
PG: 81 mmHg

Figure 7.49 Spectral Doppler of a tricuspid valve regurgitation
jet consistent with severe pulmonary hypertension.

23/04/16 1:06 pm

238

Diseases of specific organ systems

7.50

Figure 7.50 Echocardiographic short-axis view from a dog with
severe pulmonary hypertension. The right ventricle is severely
dilated. There is marked thickening of the interventricular
septum, with prominent papillary muscles on the right side.
The left ventricle is small as a result of decreased filling. LV, left
ventricle; RV, right ventricle.
7.51

rPA

PA

clinical suspicion or if an underlying cause cannot be
easily ­determined, especially if the patient has known
predisposing factors for ­hypercoagulability (Table 7.16).
Antithrombotics (aspirin, clopidogrel) may be used
adjunctively.
Pulmonary vasodilators should be used when treatment of the primary underlying disease does not
adequately control PH or in cases of idiopathic PH.
Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors (sildenafil, tadalafil, vardenafil) cause pulmonary vasodilation associated with
the nitric oxide pathway and may reduce pulmonary
artery pressure, improve quality of life, reduce clinical
signs, and prolong survival. Sildenafil is commonly used
at a dose of 1–3 mg/kg PO q8–12h. The high end of the
dosage range seems to provide the best clinical response.

Prognosis
Prognosis is related to the underlying disease process and
response to treatment. PH can rarely be cured unless it is
due to a left-to-right shunt that can be surgically corrected
(such as PDA) before irreversible damage occurs. PH is
commonly mild to moderate in patients with left-sided
heart disease and infrequently causes clinical symptoms
or requires specific treatment. Data r­ egarding the effect
of treatment with pulmonary vasodilators on survival
for the various etiologies of PH are lacking. The prognosis
for PH because of chronic lower airway disease or chronic
PTE is often poor because of the chronic nature of the disease ­process, irreversible damage, and ­remodeling of the
­pulmonary vasculature.

SYSTEMIC HYPERTENSION
Definition/overview
Figure 7.51 Echocardiographic view of the main pulmonary
artery of a dog with pulmonary hypertension. There is
severe dilation of the main and right pulmonary arteries.
PA, pulmonary artery; rPA, right pulmonary artery.

Management
Treatment is directed at resolving the underlying cause
if one can be identified. Supplemental oxygen and sedatives (butorphanol) should be provided if the patient is
in respiratory distress. PH due to left-sided heart disease
often improves with standard treatment of CHF with
administration of diuretics, ACE inhibitors, and positive
inotropes. Treatment directed at an underlying cause of
hypercoagulability along with anticoagulant therapy
(unfractionated heparin, low molecular weight heparin) for pulmonary thromboemboli is recommended.
Anticoagulant therapy should be started prior to receiving coagulation test results if there is a high index of

K22463_C007.indd 238

Systemic hypertension is defined as a systolic blood
­pressure >160 mmHg or diastolic pressure >100 mmHg.

Etiology
Systemic hypertension has been documented in veterinary patients most commonly from secondary disease
processes and is rarely essential/primary. Causes of secondary hypertension can be classified as volume ­loading
hypertension or not. Diseases that result in increased
circulating blood volume or peripheral vasoconstriction
include hyperaldosteronism, hyperthyroidism, primary
renal disease, diabetes mellitus, Cushing’s disease, pheochromocytoma, hyperviscosity syndrome (polycythemia,
multiple myeloma, macroglobulinemia), and acromegaly.
These diseases result in either activation of the RAAS
at different levels, or osmotic increases due to glucose,
steroids, red blood cells, proteins, or growth ­hormones.
Essential hypertension has been documented in a line of
Siberian Husky mixed breed dogs.

23/04/16 1:07 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

Pathophysiology
Whether primary or secondary, hypertension is ­associated
with increased systemic vascular resistance. Four organs
are particularly affected by a chronic elevation in blood
pressure: the heart, kidneys, eyes, and brain.

Clinical presentation
Most hypertensive dogs and cats are middle aged to older.
Signs reported by the owner are usually caused by the
various diseases that lead to systemic hypertension or by
lesions in the organs that are most sensitive to the effects
of hypertension. For example, hypertensive animals may
develop acute blindness or seizures. Target organ consequences caused by uncontrolled hypertension are listed
in Table 7.17. Physical examination may reveal epistaxis,
a palpable thyroid slip, a gallop rhythm, and/or heart
murmur.

Differential diagnosis

239

connected by a heparinized saline-filled tubing to a
­physiologic pressure transducer and hemodynamic oscilloscope recorder. Tubing should not be excessively long
and should be kept at the level of the heart.
Noninvasive blood pressure measurement can
be obtained by auscultation of Doppler signals with
Korotkoff sounds when blood flow to a limb or the tail is
obstructed with an appropriately sized and inflated cuff.
The choice of cuff is based on the patient’s distal limb size.
Additionally, noninvasive oscillometric blood pressure
measurement is a common technique that relies on detection of arterial pulsation through the use of an automatically inflating and deflating cuff that is wrapped around
a distal limb or tail. The accuracy of such devices may be
limited in smaller patients, where Doppler measurement
is preferred.
Diagnostic tests for secondary causes of systemic
hypertension are listed in Table 7.18.

Differential diagnosis for pathologic systemic hypertension includes physiologic hypertension from stress.

Table 7.18 Diagnostic tests for hypertensive diseases.

Diagnosis

Disease

Test

Thyroid disease

T4, free T4, antibody panel

Hyperadrenocorticism

ACTH stimulation test,
­dexamethasone suppression
test, urine cortisol:creatine ratio,
abdominal ultrasound

Pheochromocytoma

Abdominal ultrasound, plasma/
urinary catecholamine levels

Hyperaldosteronism

Serum sodium and ­potassium
­levels, aldosterone assay;
a­ bdominal ultrasound

Diagnosis of systemic hypertension is based on invasive
or noninvasive measurements of blood pressure. Invasive
blood pressure measurements are made most commonly
with the animal restrained in lateral recumbency and
a 22–25 gauge catheter inserted into the femoral artery

Table 7.17 Target organ consequences of systemic
hypertension.
Target organ

Consequences

Cardiovascular

Left ventricular concentric hypertrophy
Aortic valve insufficiency
Arteriosclerosis
Atherosclerosis

Renal disease

CBC, chemistry, urinalysis, urine
culture, urine protein:creatinine
ratio, abdominal ultrasound, renal
biopsy, creatinine clearance

Cerebrovascular

Infarcts
Hemorrhage
Cerebrovascular accidents (strokes)
Vasospasm

Polycythemia

Renal

Polyuria secondary to pressure diuresis
Glomerulosclerosis (nephrosclerosis)
Glomerular atrophy and nephron loss
Tortuous intrarenal vasculature
Ischemic renin release

Primary versus secondary; CBC,
erythropoietin assay, bone
marrow biopsy, ­cardiopulmonary
­evaluation, abdominal
­radiographs, and ultrasound

Hyperviscosity

Chemistry, protein electrophoresis,
bone marrow biopsy

Intracranial disease

MRI

Acromegaly

Growth hormone assay, clonidine
stimulation test

Hyperestrogenism

Estrogen assay, abdominal
ultrasound

Intraocular

K22463_C007.indd 239

Blindness
Retinal detachment, hemorrhage,
and/or hyphema
Closed angle glaucoma
Corneal ulceration

23/04/16 1:07 pm

240

Diseases of specific organ systems

Management

Prognosis

Underlying causes of secondary systemic h
­ ypertension
should be treated if possible. Additionally, m
­ edical
management with antihypertensive medications may
be needed acutely and in the long term for treatment
of hypertension. Emergency treatment for severe
hypertension is described in Table 7.19. Drugs com­
monly used for treatment of hypertension are listed in
Table 7.20.

Prognosis for systemic hypertension is good if an
­underlying cause is identified and treated appropriately
and if end-organ damage is minimal.

Table 7.19 Emergency treatment of systemic hypertension.
Autonomic independent
vasodilators

Calcium channel blockers

Nitroprusside IV CRI at
0.5–1 µg/kg/min carefully
titrated to effect by increasing
by 1 µg/kg/min increments
every 15 minutes as long as
the blood pressure decreases
to desired degree (usually
2–5 µg/kg/min with upper
limit of 8–10 µg/kg/min)
Hydralazine 0.5–1 mg/kg PO
q12h in patients administered
an ACE inhibitor
Amlodipine 0.01–0.1 mg/kg
PO q24h

Table 7.20 Treatment of systemic hypertension.
ACE inhibitors

Benazepril 0.25–0.5 mg/kg PO q24h
Enalapril 0.25–0.5 mg/kg PO q12–24h

Calcium channel
blockers

Amlodipine 0.01–0.1 mg/kg PO q24h
Diltiazem 0.5–2.0 mg/kg PO q8–12h
Diltiazem extended release 2–3 mg/kg
PO q12h

Beta-adrenergic
receptor blockers

Atenolol 0.5–2.0 mg/kg PO q 12–24 h
Propranolol (beta1 and 2) 0.25–0.20
mg/kg PO q8h

Alpha-adrenergic
receptor blockers

Prazosin 1 mg/15 kg dog PO q8–12h

Vasodilators

Hydralazine 0.5–1.0 mg/kg PO q12h in
patients administered an ACE inhibitor

Diuretics

Furosemide 0.5–4.0 mg/kg PO q8–12h
Spironolactone 0.5–2.0 mg/kg
PO q12–24h
Hydrochlorothiazide 0.5–1.0 mg/kg
PO q12–24h

K22463_C007.indd 240

HEARTWORM DISEASE
Heartworm disease (or dirofilariasis) occurs w
­ orldwide.
The dog is the typical host of the parasite, but
cats can also develop the infection. It is critical to
administer year-round chemoprophylaxis, which is
­
highly effective at ­protecting dogs and cats from heartworm disease.

CANINE HEARTWORM DISEASE
Etiology
Heartworm disease is caused by Dirofilaria immitis, a
filarial nematode that resides in its adult form in the
pulmonary arteries of canids, and uses several species of
mosquitoes as vector. Adequate temperature and humidity are necessary to support a viable mosquito population
and allow maturation of the heartworm larvae to the
infective stage.

Pathophysiology
Infected mosquitoes deposit 1-mm long stage 3 larvae on
the dog’s skin at the time of a blood meal. Larvae reach
the dog’s subcutaneous tissues and muscle from the
puncture side, and then molt to stage 4 larvae by day 3.
Larvae then migrate between muscle fibers where they
mature to immature adult worms that enter the circulatory system, which transports them to the pulmonary
artery by day 70. Worms measure 10 cm and become
sexually mature by 4 months. Mature females release
microfilariae, a prelarval stage, into the bloodstream
where they are picked up by mosquitoes, which completes the worm’s life cycle. Microfilariae first appear in
the ­
circulation 6 months post infection. Microfilariae
live up to 2.5 years. Heartworms harbor an endosymbiotic ­bacterium, Wolbachia spp.. Elimination of Wolbachia
has ­negative effects on Dirofilaria immitis fecundity and
development. It is also believed that Wolbachia trigger
an immune response in the dog, which may be responsible for some of the clinical signs associated with heartworm disease.
Live worms cause vascular inflammation with thickening of the pulmonary artery wall and ­pneumonitis.
Additional thromboembolic lesions occur when the worms
die and worm fragments obstruct branches of the pulmonary arteries. Over time, lung lesions result in the

23/04/16 1:07 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

development of PH and, in severe cases, congestive right
heart failure.

Clinical presentation
Most dogs with heartworm disease do not have clinical
signs. When present, typical signs involve the respiratory system with cough, tachypnea, and dyspnea;
exercise intolerance is also common. Rarely, syncope
associated with exercise, hemoptysis, and CHF (ascites)
are observed.
Caval syndrome occurs when adult worms embolize
in the right ventricle and atrium, where they interfere
with tricuspid valve closure (Figure 7.52). Caval syndrome is most likely triggered by a profound alteration in
hemodynamics, such as the one that accompanies a PTE,
and usually a large worm burden. Most dogs with caval
syndrome usually show signs of poor perfusion (weakness, tachycardia), dyspnea and tachypnea, ascites, and
hemoglobinuria.

Differential diagnosis
Other causes of PH, including PTE, and angiostrongylosis where it is prevalent (Europe, Newfoundland and
Labrador provinces of Canada). Angiostrongylus vasorum,
also referred to as the French heartworm, resides in the
pulmonary arteries of dogs. Infected dogs may show
respiratory signs, including chronic cough, dyspnea, and
exercise intolerance. Others develop PH. Diagnosis is
by detection of larvae in feces. Cross-reactions with the
Dirofilaria antigen tests have been reported.
7.52

RV

RA
LA

Figure 7.52 Echocardiographic view from a dog with caval
syndrome. Worms are visible within the right cardiac chambers.
The reflection of the ultrasound on the surface of segments of
the worms give this typical image of an ‘= sign’. LA, left atrium;
RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

K22463_C007.indd 241

241

Diagnosis
Heartworm disease is usually detected during routine
yearly screening. The heartworm antigen test, which
detects circulating adult female antigens, is a very sensitive and specific test as long as it is performed at least 6
months after infection. Therefore, a test in an infected dog
may be negative if it is performed too early, if only male
worms are present, or if there are less than three adult
worms.
Microfilariae can be detected in some dogs in the
peripheral circulation on a direct blood smear or using a
Knott’s test. However, many dogs experience occult heartworm infections (i.e. microfilariae are not present in the
circulation). This is usually the result of the regular or
occasional administration of chemoprophylactic drugs
that interfere with heartworm reproduction.
Thoracic radiographs, blood work, and urinalysis are
usually performed in heartworm-positive dogs to determine the severity of the disease. Radiographs may reveal
large and tortuous pulmonary arteries, interstitial to
alveolar lung patterns, and, on occasion, right-side cardiomegaly. Eosinophilia and basophilia can be identified
on CBC and proteinuria secondary to hearworm-induced
glomerulonephritis may be detected on urinalysis.
Echocardiography is indicated in dogs presenting with
severe signs of heartworm disease. Adult worms are
sometimes visible in the right and main pulmonary arteries. The presence of worms in the right cardiac chambers
is diagnostic for caval syndrome. In these dogs, a loud
intensity right-sided apical systolic murmur, caused by
tricuspid valve regurgitation, is usually present.

Management
In infected dogs, the goal of therapy is to kill the adult
worms in order to prevent additional damage to the lung
vasculature. All dogs with heartworm disease should
be treated, and the treatment should include adulticide
therapy. The only adulticide currently available is melarsomine dihydrochloride (Immiticide®). Before treatment
with melarsomine, preventive medications should be
administered for 2–3 months to prevent reinfection
and allow heartworm larvae to mature to a young adult
stage, which is more sensitive to the effects of melarsomine. Doxycycline (10 mg/kg PO q12h) should be given for
1 month to eliminate Wolbachia spp.. Alternatively,
minocycline can be used. Melarsomine is administered
following a 3-dose protocol (1 injection followed by
2 injections 24 hours apart 1 month later) and 2 months
of strict exercise restriction starting the day of the first
injection in order to limit the risk of thromboembolism.
Animals should be monitored for side-effects for a few

23/04/16 1:07 pm

242

Diseases of specific organ systems

hours following injection of melarsomine. Dogs should be
retested with a heartworm antigen test 6–9 months later
to confirm successful treatment (Table 7.21).
Caval syndrome is managed by surgical extraction of
the heartworms. Access to the right heart chambers is
obtained from a jugular vein. Wire baskets designed for
endoscopy inserted in the right atrium and right ventricle under fluoroscopy guidance can be used to ‘fish the
worms out’. Despite surgical extraction, the mortality of
dogs with caval syndrome approaches 40–50%. It is usually not necessary to extract worms that are visible in
the pulmonary arteries on echocardiography. Adulticide
therapy must be initiated as soon as the animal has recovered from the surgical extraction in order to eliminate
the worms still present in the distal pulmonary vessels.
In all dogs that test negative for heartworm disease,
macrocyclic lactones (ivermectin, selamectin, moxidectin,

milbemycin) are used to prevent the development of stage
3 and stage 4 larvae after mosquito bites. Macrocyclic lactones also have adulticide properties: for example, ivermectin has been shown to kill adults in 31 months. Macrocyclic
lactones may not eliminate microfilariae at preventive
doses. Year-round prophylaxis is recommended and most
drugs are approved for monthly administration.

Heartworm resistance

Table 7.21 Adulticide treatment protocol for dogs with
positive antigen test.

Most cases of drug failure to prevent heartworm infection
can be traced back to poor owner compliance. However,
there are convincing reports of resistance to macrocyclic lactones in some regions. One cause for resistance
might be the chronic use of macrocyclic lactones in heartworm-positive dogs, which selects a resistant population
of microfilariae. Results from experimental studies suggest that the resistance is heritable. It may therefore be
important to not only eliminate adult worms but also
eliminate microfilariae with microfilaricidal doses of
macrocyclic lactones.

Timeline

Treatment

Prognosis

Day 0

Start monthly preventive treatment
­(macrocyclic lactone): pretreat with
­antihistamine +/- steroids if circulating
­microfilariae are present
Start 1 month of doxycycline (10 mg/kg
PO q12h); alternatively use minocycline
Start short course of steroids at
­anti-inflammatory dose if cough or
­inflammatory lung lesions present on
radiographs
Begin exercise restriction

Day 30

Continue preventive treatment

Day 60

Administer first injection of melarsomine
(2.5 mg/kg IM)
Begin strict exercise restriction (crate,
leash walk)
Continue preventive treatment

Day 90

Administer second injection of melarsomine
(2.5 mg/kg IM)
Continue preventive treatment

Day 91

Administer third injection of melarsomine
(2.5 mg/kg IM)
Continue strict exercise restriction (crate,
leash walk)

Day 120

Resume normal exercise levels
Make sure year-round administration of
­preventive is continued

Day 271

Antigen test. If positive, repeat test 2 months
later

K22463_C007.indd 242

Dogs with low-burden infection and limited lung lesions
may fully recover after adulticide therapy. However, dogs
with severe lesions and PH may develop right-heart failure over time. Once ascites is present, survival is usually
less than 1 year.

FELINE HEARTWORM DISEASE
Introduction/overview
Heartworms rarely develop to the adult stage in cats.
Most commonly, the manifestations of feline heartworm disease are described as heartworm associated
­respiratory disease (HARD), which occurs in response to
an immune response to larvae and mimics the signs of
feline asthma.

Pathophysiology
In regions where canine heartworm disease is prevalent, cat exposure to heartworms is between 5% and 20%.
However, in this species, development of the worms usually stops at larval stage 5 (immature worms), and the
presence of adult worms is uncommon. Despite incomplete
worm development and the absence of long-lasting infection, pulmonary vascular and parenchymal inflammatory lesions are responsible for clinical signs. In cats with
mature infection, thromboembolism from dead worms
and PH causing right-sided heart failure are major complications of the disease. Finally, aberrant larval migration is
more common in cats than dogs, resulting in neurologic
signs if larvae reach the central nervous system.

23/04/16 1:07 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

243

Clinical presentation

Management

It is important to distinguish cats with mature heartworm infection and cats exposed to larvae that failed to
develop into adult worms. HARD occurs in response to the
short-lived presence of larvae in the pulmonary vasculature. Its clinical manifestations are similar to feline bronchial disease, including dyspnea and wheezes. Cough is
frequent. When a small number of adult worms survive
in the pulmonary circulation, cats usually develop severe
respiratory signs, PH, right heart failure, syncope, and
sudden death.

HARD usually responds to medications used for the
treatment of feline asthma including steroids and
bronchodilators. If adult worms are present, the high
incidence of life-threatening complications associated
with use of melarsomine limits the use of this drug in
cats. Alternatively, cats can be administered monthly
­preventive therapy and steroids should be used to control
inflammation. The authors use doxycycline for 1 month.
Sildenafil can be used if severe PH is present.

Differential diagnosis

Mortality is high in cats that harbor adult worms.

It is challenging to differentiate HARD from feline bronchitis and asthma.

Diagnosis
It is difficult to establish a definitive diagnosis of heartworm disease in cats because most of the available tests
lack sensitivity or specificity. Antigen tests, which only
detect mature female heartworms, are rarely positive
in cats, because they typically only harbor fewer than
five worms and sometimes all males. Antibody tests,
when positive, indicate that the cat has been exposed to
heartworm disease and larvae have developed at least
to stage 5 (immature worms). However, they do not indicate the presence of adult worms nor that the infection is
ongoing. A negative antibody test usually rules out the
presence of adult worms. It is usually recommended to
start with an antibody test and perform an antigen test
when the antibody test is positive. The presence of circulating microfilariae in the peripheral circulation of cats
is unusual. Indirect signs of heartworm disease, such as
eosinophilia and basophilia, enlarged pulmonary arteries and bronchointerstitial lung pattern on chest radiographs, and echocardiographic evidence of adult worms
in the branches of the pulmonary artery, are inconsistent.
Therefore, when HARD or adult worm infection is suspected, diagnosis of heartworm disease relies on suggestive clinical signs, in particular cough, and the results of
laboratory tests and imaging.

II

Prognosis

BRADYARRHYTHMIAS
Bradycardia corresponds to a heart rate less than
60 bpm in dogs and approximately 100 bpm in cats.
Bradyarrhythmias can result from an increase in vagal
tone, drugs, electrolyte abnormalities, inflammation or
infiltration of the myocardium, and degenerative disease of the conduction system. Although the etiology frequently remains unclear, the clinician needs to determine
from the ECG and the clinical signs whether extracardiac
factors are the cause for the arrhythmia, if treatment is
needed, and how to choose between medical and pacemaker therapy.

SICK SINUS SYNDROME (SINUS NODE
DYSFUNCTION)
Definition/overview
Sick sinus syndrome is a disease of the conduction system in dogs characterized by periods of normal sinus
rhythm or sinus bradycardia, interspersed with long
periods of sinus arrest or block that can last up to 10–12
seconds. The pauses result from a failure of the junctional
and ventricular pacemakers to initiate escape beats,
indicating that this disease involves the conduction
system beyond the sinus node (Figure 7.53). A variant
of the disease, sometimes called tachy–brady syndrome,

7.53

Figure 7.53 ECG (lead II) from a dog with sick sinus syndrome. The initial sinus rhythm is followed by a long period of sinus arrest
that is interrupted by a junctional escape beat.

K22463_C007.indd 243

23/04/16 1:07 pm

244

Diseases of specific organ systems

is characterized by periods of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia followed by a temporary failure of the
sinus rhythm to resume when the tachycardia abruptly
terminates.

Etiology
The cause for sick sinus syndrome is unknown. However,
there is a breed predisposition, with Miniature Schnauzers
and West Highland White Terriers being overrepresented,
and the condition typically occurs in older dogs.

Clinical presentation
Exercise intolerance and lethargy are some of the clinical
signs reported with sick sinus syndrome. Syncope occurs
when periods of sinus arrest last more than 6–8 seconds.
The use of opioids as sedatives frequently results in a prolongation of the periods of asystole, and it is not uncommon for dogs that were asymptomatic while awake to
become hemodynamically unstable after sedation or
­general anesthesia.

Differential diagnosis
Other bradyarrhythmias that may cause clinical signs, in
particular bradyarrhythmias resulting from high vagal
tone in the presence of GI, respiratory, neurologic, and
ocular diseases. Marked vagotonia may cause sinus bradycardia, pronounced respiratory sinus arrhythmia, and
occasionally second-degree AV block, which may mimic a
mild form of sick sinus syndrome.

Diagnosis
In older small breed dogs, the suspicion of sick sinus
syndrome is usually confirmed on an ECG recording. To
differentiate sick sinus syndrome from vagally-induced
bradycardias, response to the administration of parasympatholytic medications can be evaluated. A rapid increase
in heart rate following IV administration of atropine (0.04
mg/kg) or glycopyrrolate (0.01 mg/kg) strongly suggests
the contribution of vagal tone to the bradyarrhythmia.
However, an increase in heart rate may also be observed
in dogs with sick sinus syndrome. It is therefore recommended to evaluate the ECG over a longer period of time
using a 24-hour Holter recording.

Management
Temporary response to terbutaline (0.2 mg/kg PO q8–12h
or 0.01 mg/kg IV), a selective beta2-agonist commonly
used as bronchodilator, or aminophylline (10 mg/kg twice
PO q12h or 10 mg/kg IV), a phosphodiesterase ­inhibitor
and bronchodilator with mild chronotropic effect, is
observed in some dogs with sick sinus syndrome. However,
dogs frequently develop side-effects with chronic use of
these drugs, and the clinical signs frequently reccur as
the disease progresses (Table 7.22).
Permanent pacemaker implantation is indicated in
dogs that display clinical signs. The simplest and most
commonly used type of pacing in veterinary patients
involves a single lead placed in the right ventricle via the
jugular vein and a generator placed subcutaneously in the

Table 7.22 Drugs for the treatment of bradycardia.
Drug

Dosage

Indications

Atropine

0.02–0.04 mg/kg SC, IM, IV (D,C)

Sinus bradycardia
Sick sinus syndrome
First- and second-degree AV block

Glycopyrrolate

0.005–0.01 mg/kg SC, IM, IV (D,C)

Sinus bradycardia
Sick sinus syndrome
First- and second-degree AV block

Terbutaline

0.2 mg/kg PO q8–12h (D)
0.625 mg PO q8–12h (C)
0.01 mg/kg IV (D,C)

Sinus bradycardia
Sick sinus syndrome

Isoproterenol

0.04–0.09 μg/kg/min, to effect (D,C)

Second- and third-degree AV block

Aminophylline
Theophylline

10 mg/kg PO q12h (extended release) (D,C)
10 mg/kg IV (D)

Sick sinus syndrome

AV, atrioventricular; C, cat; D, dog.

K22463_C007.indd 244

23/04/16 1:07 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

245

cervical region. Pacemakers are able to detect spontaneous
activity and stimulate cardiac contraction if the heart rate
drops below a preprogramed number (usually around 80
bpm). In dogs with sick sinus syndrome the pacemaker
maintains a regular rhythm and adequate cardiac output
during periods of sinus arrest; because the rhythm abnormalities associated with sick sinus syndrome are intermittent, the pacemaker is usually activated less than 50%
of the time in these dogs. It therefore mimics a ventricular
escape rhythm, whose rate can be adjusted.

the ventricles (second-degree AV block). In the most
severe form of the disease, there is complete dissociation
between impulses in the atrium and an escape rhythm
originating in the ventricles that maintains a low heart
rate and a decreased cardiac output (third-degree AV
block). Clinical signs occur when too many supraventricular impulses are blocked in the AV node, which results in
the absence of ventricular contraction for 4–8 seconds, or
when the slow ventricular escape rhythm does not maintain adequate cardiac output.

Prognosis

Clinical presentation

Clinical signs worsen as the disease progresses and
without treatment some dogs experience several syncopal episodes every day. Some will eventually die
suddenly, but it is common for dogs with sick sinus syndrome to experience signs for months and even years
before they die. Long-term prognosis is good after pacemaker ­
implantation if complications associated with
the ­procedure do not occur within 1 month, and in the
absence of u
­ nderlying ­structural heart disease, such as
degenerative mitral valve disease, which is also common
in older small breed dogs and may lead to CHF. Major but
rare pacemaker complications include lead dislodgement
during the first 4 weeks following implantation, and
device infection, which is more likely to occur during the
first year.

Animals with first-degree AV block do not display clinical
signs, as all the impulses from the atrium are transmitted
to the ventricles with a short delay. Clinical signs of lethargy, weakness, or syncope only occur in the severe forms
of second-degree AV block and third-degree AV block.
Surprisingly, some dogs with third-degree AV block and
an average heart rate between 20 and 60 bpm do not show
obvious clinical signs. Clinical signs are commonly absent
in cats because the ventricular escape rhythm is usually
around 100 bpm in this species. However, if a slow heart
rate persists for several months, it will p
­ rogressively
lead to cardiac enlargement and possibly CHF (usually
right-sided).

ATRIOVENTRICULAR BLOCK
Definition/overview
AV block corresponds to a delay of conduction or the
inability for a impulse originating from the atrium to
cross the AV node. The AV node is the only pathway for
electrical impulses to travel from atrium to ventricle.

Etiology
Fibrosis of the AV node is the most common cause for
AV block in older dogs and cats. Inflammation and infiltration of the AV node by neoplastic cells (e.g. lymphoma)
are other causes of AV block. Elevated vagal tone may
delay AV node conduction. Drugs, such as beta-blockers
and calcium-channel blockers, can also cause AV block.

Pathophysiology
Three forms of AV block, corresponding to different
degrees of disease severity, are recognized. In the mild
form of the disease, all impulses originating at the supraventricular level (usually the sinus node) cross the AV
node but with some delay (first-degree AV block). As the
disease progresses, some impulses are unable to reach

K22463_C007.indd 245

Differential diagnosis
Other cardiac causes of syncope and lethargy.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually easily reached from an ECG. With
first-degree AV block all the atrial impulses are conducted to the ventricles, but the PR interval is prolonged
on the ECG (PR >130 ms in dogs, PR >90 ms in cats).
Second-degree AV block is diagnosed when some P waves
are not ­followed by a QRS complex on the surface ECG
(Figure 7.54).
Two types of second-degree AV blocks are recognized.
Mobitz type I second-degree AV block is characterized
by a progressive increase in the PR interval duration
ending with a blocked P wave, known as Wenckebach
phenomenon. It usually results from a combination of
AV node fibrosis and a progressive increase in vagal
tone. This form of AV block is usually benign and does
not require specific treatment. Mobitz type II second-degree AV block is characterized by the unexpected occurrence of blocked P waves. PR intervals before and after
the blocked P waves are identical. The QRS complexes
of conducted beats can be wide when the area of block
is below the His bundle, causing bundle branch blocks
and intraventricular conduction delays. This form of

23/04/16 1:07 pm

246

Diseases of specific organ systems

block is more likely to worsen and result in clinical
signs. Administration of atropine (0.04 mg/kg IV) can
help the clinician differentiate between the two forms
of block. Type I usually improves after atropine and type
II worsens.
Third-degree, or complete, AV block is characterized
by an absence of conducted P waves to the ventricles
(Figure 7.55). The ECG displays independent atrial and
ventricular activities. Cardiac output is dramatically
reduced. In response, the atrial rate, which is under control of the adrenergic tone, is elevated. Electrical activation of the ventricles is dependent on an escape rhythm
beyond the site of the block. The QRS complexes are generally wide and bizarre at rates of around 20–60 bpm in
dogs and 60–120 bpm in cats. In addition, the ventricular
rate is regular, unless ventricular premature beats originating from an ischemic myocardium are present.
A 24-hour Holter recording is sometimes necessary to
identify occasional second-degree AV block as the cause
for syncope. An echocardiogram is always indicated to

identify a tumor as the cause for AV block and to identify concomitant structural cardiac disease. AV block is
often associated with structural cardiac disease in cats.
Although a mild elevation of serum cTnI concentration is
common in dogs with third-degree (complete) AV block,
a marked increase in concentration suggests myocarditis
as the cause for the arrhythmia.

Management
Pacemaker implantation is usually the best treatment
option when clinical signs are present. AV node conduction may improve in some dogs with second-degree AV
block after administration of theophylline or terbutaline.

Prognosis
Good after pacemaker implantation in dogs with clinical
signs. Some dogs with myocarditis spontaneously return
to sinus rhythm.

7.54

P

P

P

P

P

Figure 7.54 ECG (lead II) from a dog with first-degree and Mobitz type 1 second-degree atrioventricular block. The baseline PR
interval is prolonged. There is one nonconducted P wave consistent with second-degree atrioventricular block. Note the variable
PR interval indicating the effects of vagal tone on atrioventricular conduction.

7.55
P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

Figure 7.55 ECG (lead II) from a dog with third-degree atrioventricular block. There is complete dissociation between the P waves
and QRS complexes. Some P waves overlap T waves.

K22463_C007.indd 246

23/04/16 1:07 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

247

ATRIAL STANDSTILL

TACHYARRHYTHMIAS

Definition/overview

Tachycardia is defined by a heart rate typically
>180–200 bpm in dogs and >220–240 bpm in cats.
Tachyarrhythmias are divided into supraventricular
tachycardia, which originates from structures above
the ventricles (sinus node, atrial myocardium, AV node),
and ventricular tachycardia. AF, a form of supraventricular tachycardia, and ventricular tachycardia are the
most common types of tachyarrhythmias. Other types of
supraventricular tachycardias are rare and can usually
be managed in the same way as AF.

Atrial standstill corresponds to the absence of visible
atrial electrical activity (and therefore contraction) on
the ECG. It can be permanent or temporary. Permanent
atrial standstill is rare.

Etiology
Permanent atrial standstill affects young dogs and a
genetic etiology is likely. It may be more prevalent in
English Springer Spaniels. Hyperkalemia is the cause for
temporary atrial standstill.

Clinical presentation

ATRIAL FIBRILLATION

Dogs with permanent atrial standstill usually present
with signs associated with severe bradycardia. Animals
with hyperkalemia have signs caused by the underlying disease, including Addison’s disease, urinary tract
obstruction or rupture, severe arterial thromboembolism
in cats, and tumor lysis syndrome.

Definition/overview

Diagnosis

Atrial dilation is a risk factor for developing AF.
Therefore, AF commonly occurs in large breed dogs with
only mild to moderate atrial dilation, but is rarely present in small breed dogs with degenerative mitral valve
disease despite extreme atrial dilation. It is also rarely
diagnosed in cats. Fibrosis, inflammation, and autonomic
­imbalances are other important contributors to the initiation of AF.

Permanent atrial standstill is recognized on the ECG as a
lack of P waves with a regular ventricular or AV nodal escape
rhythm at rates of 20–60 bpm in dogs (Figure 7.56). The
ECG changes of hyperkalemia include a narrowing and
increased amplitude of the T wave as plasma concentration of potassium increases above 5.5 mmol/l. As potassium continues to rise, it leads to a decrease in heart rate
associated with reduced P wave amplitude and a widening of the QRS complexes. P waves then become invisible,
consistent with a sino-ventricular rhythm that cannot be
distinguished from atrial standstill.

Management
Permanent atrial standstill requires permanent pacemaker implantation. Successful management of hyperkalemia results in return of normal cardiac rhythm and
ECG trace.

Prognosis
Permanent atrial standstill carries a poor prognosis, as
the disease affecting the atrium and causing a progressive replacement of the myocytes by fibrous tissue seems
to progress to the rest of the myocardium.
7.56

Figure 7.56 ECG (lead II) from a dog with atrial standstill. There
are no visible P waves and the ventricular rhythm is regular.

K22463_C007.indd 247

AF is characterized by uncoordinated atrial activation
from multiple simultaneous electrical wavelets resulting
in inadequate mechanical contraction of the atrium and
an irregular ventricular response rate.

Etiology

Pathophysiology
Most dogs with AF have underlying primary cardiac disease in the form of DCM or degenerative mitral valve
­disease. The atrial enlargement provides the substrate
for maintenance of the arrhythmia. During AF, the AV
node is bombarded by hundreds of impulses originating
from the atria. Because the AV node has the role of a filter,
only some of the impulses are able to reach the ventricles, with an irregular response to the supraventricular
impulses. In the presence of heart failure, elevated adrenergic tone decreases the filtering property of the AV node
resulting in tachycardia. Less commonly, ‘lone’ AF occurs
in giant breed dogs with structurally normal hearts. In
this instance, vagal tone, which is typically high in dogs
in the absence of heart failure, increases the filtering
effect of the AV node, resulting in a heart rate within
the normal range for dogs. AF is rarely identified in cats.
However, most cats with AF have underlying structural
cardiac disease with atrial enlargement. Many of these
cats also show signs of CHF. Once initiated, AF does not
spontaneously resolve.

23/04/16 1:07 pm

248

Diseases of specific organ systems

Clinical presentation
The vast majority of dogs with AF are giant and large breed
dogs. In the giant breed group, Irish Wolfhounds, Mastiffs,
Newfoundlands, Rottweilers, and Great Danes are overrepresented, with a male predisposition. Cats with AF are
usually older males. Most dogs with ‘lone’ AF are asymptomatic. Conversely, some dogs with compensated cardiac
disease and AF show signs of lethargy, ­exercise intolerance and, rarely, anorexia, cough, or ­syncope. When AF
occurs in the presence of CHF, generalized weakness, dyspnea, cough, and abdominal distension from ascites are
usually present. Cats frequently show signs of an underlying cardiac disease, including dyspnea and arterial
thromboembolism. However, AF can also be an incidental
finding on auscultation in this species.

Differential diagnosis
Other permanent tachyarrhythmias. The distinctive feature of AF is that it is irregular, whereas most sustained
tachyarrhythmias are regular.

Diagnosis
On physical examination, AF is identified as a sustained
and ‘irregularly irregular’ rhythm accompanied by pulse
deficits. A murmur may be ausculted, as severe underlying cardiac disease is common in dogs with AF.
On the surface ECG, AF is an irregular tachyarrhythmia, with usually narrow QRS complexes and no P waves,
which can be replaced by an undulation of the baseline,
or F waves (Figure 7.57). It is also permanent, indicating
that sinus rhythm never spontaneously resumes following initiation of AF, and the average heart rate is typically
>180–200 bpm. The rate is much lower with ‘lone’ AF, usually approaching 100–120 bpm at rest. Although AF is a
supraventricular tachycardia, lesions of the ventricular
conduction system (bundle branch block) may result in
a widening of the QRS complexes, which may resemble
those of ventricular tachycardia.
Determination of the average ventricular rate
during AF provides critical information in deciding on
a treatment strategy. Unfortunately, brief ECG recordings obtained in an unfamiliar environment do not

II

adequately reflect the daily variations of heart rate.
Heart rate is therefore better assessed from a 24-hour
Holter recording. For reference, the average heart rate of
healthy dogs v
­ aries between 85 and 100 bpm. Conversely,
it is approximately 120 bpm in dogs with ‘lone’ AF, 155
bpm in dogs with underlying cardiac disease, and 200
bpm in dogs with CHF.

Management
A rate-control strategy is usually applied to the t­ reatment
of AF. The rate-control approach aims at slowing ventricular rate in response to the rapid supraventricular
impulses. However, it does not terminate the arrhythmia.
Rate control is based on using drugs to decrease the ability of the AV node to conduct impulses. Ideally, the need
for pharmacologic control of the heart rate is determined
from the heart rate distribution obtained from a baseline 24-hour Holter recording. The effect of rate-control
drugs is then assessed on a follow-up Holter 2 weeks after
treatment initiation. As for defining adequate control,
an average heart rate of no more than 120–140 bpm is
considered adequate to observe clinical improvement. If
the average heart rate is considered too high, drug dosages are increased by small increments, with close monitoring of the animal’s clinical status, as the response to
antiarrhythmics varies between patients. In contrast,
­
medical therapy is usually not needed in dogs with ‘lone’
AF; in these dogs, AF can be reverted to normal rhythm
using DC electrical cardioversion.
Diltiazem is widely used for the management of
AF. A graded dose of diltiazem results in a decrease in
ventricular response rate, because of slower action
­
potential propagation in the AV node. Oral formulations
include an extended release form. A dose of 3–4 mg/kg
PO q12h of the extended release formulation usually
achieves ­
satisfactory rate control. Better rate control,
­especially during periods associated with high adrenergic tone, can be obtained by adding digoxin to the
treatment regimen. Calcium channel blockers decrease
ventricular ­
contractility and may cause hypotension
when used in animals with severely depressed cardiac
function.
7.57

Figure 7.57 ECG (lead II) from a dog with atrial fibrillation. It is an irregular tachycardia. The QRS complexes are narrow indicating
that it is supraventricular in origin. In addition, there are no visible P waves.

K22463_C007.indd 248

23/04/16 1:07 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

249

Table 7.23 Drugs for the treatment of supraventricular tachycardia.
Drug

Dosage

Comment

Digoxin

0.005 mg/kg PO q12h (D)

AF (rate control)

Diltiazem

0.1–0.4 mg/kg IV over 5 min (D,C)
0.05–0.15 mg/kg/h CRI (D,C)
1–2 mg/kg PO q8h (D,C)
3 mg/kg PO q12h (extended release) (D)
15–30 mg PO q12–24h (extended release) (C)

SVT (rate control or conversion)
AF (rate control)

Atenolol

0.2–1 mg/kg PO q12–24h (D)
6.25–12.5 mg PO q12–24h (C)

SVT (rate control or conversion)
AF (rate ontrol)

Esmolol

0.2–0.5 mg/kg IV over 1 min, repeat q5min (D,C)

SVT conversion

Procainamide

5–15 mg/kg IV over 1 min (D)
1–2 mg/kg IV (C)
20–50 µg/kg/min CRI (D)

SVT conversion

Lidocaine

2 mg/kg IV over 30 sec. Maximum 3 boluses (D)
0.25–0.5 mg/kg IV (C)

SVT conversion
Vagally-mediated AF conversion

Sotalol

1–3 mg/kg PO q12h (D,C)

SVT conversion
SR maintenance

C, cat; D, dog; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia; AF, atrial fibrillation; SR, sinus rhythm.

The range of indications and side-effects for
­beta-blockers are very similar to those of calcium channel blockers. Beta1-selective agents, such as atenolol, are
preferred to nonselective agents that can cause bronchospasm (Table 7.23).

block, but slower than ventricular tachycardia, is called
accelerated idioventricular rhythm.

Etiology

Long-term prognosis is good for dogs with ‘lone’ AF.
However, in some breeds, in particular Irish Wolfhounds,
it may be an early sign of DCM. In dogs with AF with
­underlying structural heart failure, median survival has
been reported to be 32 months. However, it was only 5
months when CHF was present. In cats, treatment targeted
at AF is rarely required as their ventricular response rate
usually approaches the heart rate recorded in cats with
sinus rhythm and heart failure.

Ventricular tachycardia is usually diagnosed in Boxers
and English Bulldogs with ARVC and in Dobermanns
with DCM. It can also occur in the presence of myocarditis, infiltrative cardiac disease, electrolyte imbalances, pheochromocytoma, or hypoxemia/ischemia.
Cats are rarely diagnosed with ventricular tachycardia
that requires treatment. In this species, it is associated
with HCM and hyperthyroidism. Accelerated idioventricular rhythm is triggered by episodes of ischemia/
reperfusion i­nvolving extracardiac tissues (e.g. gastric
dilatation volvulus, trauma, arterial thromboembolism,
or pancreatitis).

VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA

Pathophysiology

Prognosis

Definition/overview
Ventricular tachycardia is a rapid rhythm originating
from the ventricles. A ventricular rhythm with a rate
above the typical ventricular escape rhythm seen with AV

K22463_C007.indd 249

The two factors that determine the clinical consequences of ventricular tachycardia are rate and duration. Ventricular tachycardia must be sustained (more
than 30 seconds) and rapid (usually more than 220–240
bpm) to cause clinical signs. Some forms of ventricular

23/04/16 1:07 pm

250

Diseases of specific organ systems

tachycardia can degenerate into ventricular fibrillation,
resulting in sudden death.

Clinical presentation
Dogs with intermittent ventricular premature contractions do not show clinical signs. It is only when the rate of
the ventricular tachycardia is rapid (>250–300 bpm) that
signs of poor cardiac output may be present and syncope
may occur. Clinical signs will also be influenced by the
degree of underlying heart disease. Thus, a patient with
systolic dysfunction and ventricular arrhythmia may
exhibit clinical signs at a slower rate of ventricular firing
than a patient without underlying myocardial disease
and ventricular tachycardia.

Diagnosis
Ventricular arrhythmias are diagnosed on ECG by the
presence of wide and bizarre complexes (Figure 7.58).
Beats originating in the ventricles are wide because the
electrical impulse depolarizing the ventricles does not
use the specialized cells of the conduction system. The
QRS complex of ventricular beats is followed by a large
T wave opposite to the direction of the QRS complex.
Ventricular tachycardia is usually regular. It can last for
a few seconds or be sustained for hours. A 24-hour Holter
recording is indicated to evaluate the frequency of the
arrhythmia and determine if its severity explains the clinical signs manifested by the animal. An echocardiogram
is recommended to identify underlying structural heart
disease and measure the left ventricular function. Chest

7.58

II

I II

radiographs and blood work are indicated to rule out any
extracardiac cause for the arrhythmia, especially in the
presence of an idioventricular accelerated rhythm.

Management
Treatment of ventricular tachycardia is justified when it
causes hemodynamic compromise and, therefore, clinical
signs. Hemodynamic compromise is typically related to the
rate of the tachycardia and its duration. Sometimes treatment is initiated in apparently ­nonclinical animals based
on the arrhythmia burden in an a Holter recording and the
concern that the arrhythmia could worsen or result in sudden death. The risk of sudden death is probably higher in
the presence of structural cardiac disease.
For a dog presented in an emergency with rapid sustained ventricular tachycardia, treatment is based on
lidocaine boluses. It is important to measure serum
potassium concentration, as lidocaine works better with
normal ­potassium levels. Procainamide is an alternative
to lidocaine when it fails to terminate the arrhythmia.
Lidocaine should be used carefully in cats because they
are more likely to develop neurologic side-effects.
Long-term management of ventricular tachycardia is
based on oral drugs and frequent monitoring with 24-hour
Holter recordings to evaluate the response to treatment.
Sotalol, which shares antiarrhythmic and beta-blocking
properties, is usually very effective at controlling ventricular arrhythmias in dogs. Mexiletine is another good
antiarrhythmic agent, but has become increasingly difficult to obtain for veterinary patients and has several
times come off the market. It is often used in combination with atenolol or sotalol for resistant arrhythmias
or as an initial antiarrhythmic agent for dogs with systolic dysfunction. Amiodarone appears to be effective for
arrhythmias refractory to other drugs; however, it has
been reported to have significant and severe side-effects
in dogs. The low end of the dosage range should be used
first and titrated upwards only if necessary. Amiodarone
very commonly causes adverse clinical signs with chronic
use. It may cause anorexia due to elevated liver enzymes,
therefore liver enzymes should be evaluated before starting and periodically while receiving amiodarone, and
any time anorexia develops. It may also cause neutropenia of unknown clinical significance and neurologic
signs and/or ataxia, especially at higher doses and with
prolonged use. IV antiarrhythmic agents are rarely needed
in the cat. Oral products, in particular atenolol and ­sotalol,
are usually sufficient for clinical needs (Table 7.24).

Prognosis
Figure 7.58 ECG from a dog with ventricular tachycardia. The
QRS complexes are ‘wide and bizarre’ and the rhythm is regular.

K22463_C007.indd 250

Prognosis depends more on the underlying etiology than
the tachycardia itself.

23/04/16 1:07 pm

Cardiovascular disorders

251

Table 7.24 Drugs for the treatment of ventricular tachycardia.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING

Drug

Dosage

Amiodarone

10–20 mg/kg PO q24h for 7–10 days
then reduce to 3–15 mg/kg PO q24–48h
­thereafter (D)

Atenolol

0.2–1 mg/kg PO q12–24h (D)
6.25–12.5 mg PO q12–24h (C)

Esmolol

0.2–0.5 mg/kg IV over 1 min, repeat
q5min (D,C)

Lidocaine

2 mg/kg IV over 30 sec. Maximum 3
boluses (D)
0.25–0.5 mg/kg IV (C)
25–80 µg/kg/min CRI (D)

Mexiletine

4–8 mg/kg PO q8h (D)

Procainamide

5–15 mg/kg IV over 1 min (D)
1–2 mg/kg IV (C)
20–50 µg/kg/min CRI (D)

Sotalol

1–3 mg/kg PO q12h (D,C)

American Heartworm Society. Current guidelines for the
­diagnosis, prevention, and management of heartworm
(Dirofilaria immitis) infection in dogs. http://www.
heartwormsociety.org
Atkins C, Bonagura J, Ettinger S et al. (2009) Guidelines for the
diagnosis and treatment of canine chronic valvular heart
disease. J Vet Intern Med 23:1142–1150.
Brown S, Atkins C, Bagley R et al. (2007) American College
of Veterinary Internal Medicine. Guidelines for the
­identification, evaluation, and management of systemic
hypertension in dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med 21:542–558.
Kellihan HB, Stepien RL (2012) Pulmonary hypertension in
canine degenerative mitral valve disease. J Vet Cardiol
14:149–164.
Oyama MA, Reynolds CA (2014) Ventricular arrhythmias in dogs.
In: Kirk’s Current Veterinary Therapy XV. (eds. JD Bonagura, DC
Twedt) Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis, pp. 745–748.
Pariaut R, Santilli R, Moise NS (2014) Supraventricular
­tachyarrhythmias in dogs. In: Kirk’s Current Veterinary
Therapy XV. (eds. JD Bonagura, DC Twedt) Elsevier Saunders,
St. Louis, pp. 737–745.

C, cat; D, dog.

K22463_C007.indd 251

23/04/16 1:07 pm

This page intentionally left blank

253

Chapter 8
Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)
Frédéric Gaschen

Part 1: Diseases of the pharynx,
masticatory muscles, and salivary
glands
DYSPHAGIA
Definition/overview
The word ‘dysphagia’ is derived from Greek and means
difficulty in eating and swallowing. A closely related
term is odynophagia, which describes pain while eating/­
swallowing. The three phases of the normal swallowing
reflex are described in Table 8.1.

Etiology
Three types of dysphagia are recognized.

Oral dysphagia
Oral dysphagia relates to a difficulty prehending food and
forming a bolus of food. It can occur with most oral and
dental diseases. Additionally, tongue atrophy or paralysis
and diseases of the masticatory muscles and temporomandibular joint can also lead to oral dysphagia.

Pharyngeal dysphagia
Pharyngeal dysphagia is characterized by abnormal
­passage of food through the oropharynx. It may occur

with pharyngeal diseases such as pharyngeal edema,
trauma and foreign bodies, intraluminal masses, and
extraluminal masses (e.g. grossly enlarged lymph nodes,
retropharyngeal abscess, salivary gland enlargement), or
result from abnormalities in the tightly regulated swallowing reflex. Affected animals may show numerous
unsuccessful attempts to swallow, regurgitate immediately, gag, cough, and experience nasal reflux. Aspiration
pneumonia is common. Diagnosis is confirmed by fluoroscopy that shows failure of the pharynx to constrict
and the upper esophageal sphincter (UES) to relax. In the
absence of an obvious cause for dysphagia, rabies should
be considered in unvaccinated dogs. Dogs with laryngeal
paralysis or myasthenia gravis may show concurrent
pharyngeal dysphagia. If no cause can be identified, the
prognosis of pharyngeal dysphagia is generally poor.

Cricopharyngeal dysphagia
Cricopharyngeal dysphagia is characterized by a failure
of the UES to relax (achalasia) or a lack of coordination
between pharyngeal contraction and UES relaxation (dyssynchrony). This disorder is rare, and is usually observed
in puppies at the time of weaning. Detailed oropharyngeal inspection yields no abnormal findings. Diagnosis is
confirmed with a fluoroscopic swallowing study showing
that the food remains in the pharynx in spite of normal

Table 8.1 Physiology of swallowing.
Oropharyngeal phase

Voluntary oral stage: formation of food bolus in the oropharynx, passage to the base of tongue,
pharyngeal peristaltic contractions, bolus propelled to the laryngopharynx
Pharyngeal phase: contraction of oral and tongue muscles with closure of pathway between oral
cavity and pharynx, elevation of the soft palate, glottis closure, and tipping of the epiglottis after
rostral displacement of the larynx
Cricopharyngeal phase: relaxation of the UES (cricopharyngeal and thyropharyngeal muscles) to
allow food bolus to be propelled into the upper esophagus

Esophageal phase

A primary peristaltic wave is generated in the pharynx and propagated through the esophagus
to propel the bolus to the LES (lower esophageal sphincter). If the primary wave is not successful,
a secondary wave is quickly generated by esophageal distension

Gastroesophageal phase

Relaxation of the LES and passage of the bolus into the stomach

K22463_C008.indd 253

25/04/16 10:33 pm

254

Diseases of specific organ systems

pharyngeal motility. A congenital neurologic disorder
is suspected. In the absence of complicating factors, the
prognosis for dogs with confirmed cricopharyngeal achalasia is good after myotomy or myectomy of the cricopharyngeal muscle. Injection of botulinum toxin A into the
muscle through an oral approach with endoscopic guidance has been anecdotally successful. However, the effect
is limited to 2–4 months. The procedure may help identify
patients who would most benefit from surgery.

Management

Pathophysiology

PHARYNGITIS AND TONSILLITIS

Bouvier des Flandres dogs may be affected with a
­congenital pharyngeal myopathy. Golden Retrievers are
overrepresented among dogs with cricopharyngeal dysphagia. Large breed dogs are also predisposed to laryngeal paralysis, a disease more commonly associated with
pharyngeal and upper esophageal dysfunction

Clinical presentation
While dogs and cats with oral dysphagia are reluctant
or unable to chew properly, animals with pharyngeal or
oropharyngeal dysphagia are unable to swallow the food
bolus in spite of repeated attempts. If the affected animal
takes a quick breath of air between swallowing actions,
food may enter the larynx and trachea, eliciting a cough.
Dogs will try again and again, and will sometimes succeed
in achieving a more adequate swallowing action. They
regurgitate the food bolus, which is covered with saliva.
Their ability to drink from a water bowl may be ­maintained
or impaired as well. Animals are generally hungry and
weight loss and lean body condition are common. Other
signs include coughing and nasal discharge.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis relies on clinical signs (Box 8.1). A thorough
oral and pharyngeal examination, ideally in the sedated
animal, is often valuable. Radiographs of the pharynx are
recommended in animals with suspect foreign body (FB)
or other causes of obstruction. Fluoroscopic swallow studies can be very useful to confirm the type of d
­ ysphagia,
but are only available in referral centers. If aspiration
pneumonia is suspected, chest radiographs are helpful to
evaluate the severity and extent of the process.
Box 8.1 Practical tip on the clinical approach to
dysphagic dogs and cats.
First, observe the animal while it is eating. Videos filmed
by the owner can be helpful as well. This allows recognizing
the different types of dysphagia and designing a targeted
further approach

K22463_C008.indd 254

Nonspecific measures include optimizing the ­consistency
of the food (generally, moist food is best tolerated). Specific
treatments correcting the primary disease are most helpful if available (see above). Additionally, in severe or
untreatable cases, endoscopically or surgically placed
low profile gastrostomy tubes allow bypass of the pharynx and proximal esophagus in order to provide enteral
nutrition.

Definition/overview
Inflammation causes hyperemia and swelling of the
­pharyngeal mucosa, which may be associated with tonsillar enlargement and protrusion of the tonsils out of the
palatine fossae. Tonsillitis is not uncommon in the dog,
particularly in young miniature and toy breeds, but is
quite rare in the cat. The inflammation is usually bilateral;
however, it may be unilateral in association with FBs such
as grass blades, pieces of wood, and grass seeds.

Etiology
Acute pharyngitis with or without secondary t­onsillitis
may occur following trauma, foreign bodies, insect stings,
snake bites, allergic reactions, chemical or thermal injuries, and viral infection of the upper respiratory tract
(cat). Additionally, disorders causing chronic vomiting,
gagging, coughing, or regurgitation may be associated
with acute tonsillitis.

Clinical presentation
Coughing, gagging, retching, or expectorating white
foamy mucus (which may be confused with vomiting
by the pet’s owner) are commonly reported. Dysphagia,
repeated swallowing attempts, odynophagia, hypersalivation, excessive licking, and pica can also be observed.
Some animals can present with decreased appetite,
malaise, and fever. Pharyngeal examination reveals a
hyperemic (dog) or injected (cat) pharynx, possibly with
enlarged tonsils protruding out of the palatine fossae.
Hyperemia, mottled appearance, petechiations, and
white specks are reliable signs of acute inflammation.
Chronically inflamed tonsils may just be enlarged with
an irregular surface.

Differential diagnosis
Tonsillitis should be differentiated from tonsillar
neoplasia such as lymphoma (unilateral or bilateral
­
enlargement [Figure 8.1]) or squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) (unilateral, highly malignant).

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

255

MUCOCELE, SIALOCELE

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the abnormal appearance of ­the
pharynx and tonsils in association with the existence of
­compatible clinical signs. Secondary tonsillitis is common, and a thorough search for a primary underlying
disease should be performed. Radiographs of the pharynx and retropharyngeal area may reveal the presence
of FBs or space-occupying processes (Figures 8.2, 8.3).
Fine needle aspiration or brush cytology may help rule
out neoplasia and confirm inflammation.

Management

Definition/overview
Sialocele is the most frequently diagnosed salivary gland
disorder of dogs. It consists of an accumulation of saliva in
the periglandular tissues due to salivary duct obstruction
and/or rupture. The wall of the mucocele is not epithelial, therefore mucoceles are not true salivary gland cysts.

8.2

For acute cases, treatment usually consists of a 10–14-day
course of antibiotics (e.g. amoxicillin and clavulanic acid),
possibly with analgesics if indicated. In chronic cases
with significantly enlarged tonsils, tonsillectomy may be
required if the tonsils become an obstacle preventing passage of food into the pharynx.

Prognosis
Good, although acute tonsillitis may recur. The disorder
usually resolves spontaneously with time.

DISEASES OF THE SALIVARY GLANDS
The four salivary glands of dogs and cats are the submandibular (located rostrolaterally from the submandibular lymph node), sublingual, parotid (under mandibular
ramus), and zygomatic (infraorbital) glands. Salivary
gland diseases are uncommon in dogs and very rare
in cats.

Figure 8.2 Proximal cervical radiograph from a 5-year-old
Belgian Shepherd Dog taken 2 hours after the owner
pulled a stick that appeared to be stuck in the dog’s throat.
There is retropharyngeal accumulation of air. Persistent
wood fragments cannot be ruled out based on these films.
Esophagoscopy was negative, and the dog recovered with
antibiotic treatment.

8.1

8.3

Figure 8.1 Bilaterally enlarged tonsils in a middle aged
mixed-breed dog. Cytology from a fine needle aspirate revealed
lymphoma. (Courtesy R. Husnik)

Figure 8.3 Proximal cervical radiograph of an 8-year-old
Bernese Mountain Dog with dysphagia. A space-occupying
lesion is pushing the pharynx, esophagus, and trachea
ventrally. Fine needle aspiration revealed histiocytic sarcoma.

K22463_C008.indd 255

25/04/16 10:33 pm

256

Diseases of specific organ systems

They can occur in the vicinity of each salivary gland;
however, the sublingual and submandibular glands are
the most frequently affected. German Shepherd Dogs
and Poodles appear to be more susceptible to developing
sialoceles.

Management

Etiology

Prognosis is good following surgery.

Trauma is thought to be the most frequent cause of
­sialocele (direct trauma, FB, sialadenolith), although signs
of original trauma have usually resolved by the time the
sialocele is diagnosed.

Treatment consists of removal of the ipsilateral ­sublingual
and submandibular gland as well as drainage of the fluid
accumulation.

Prognosis

SIALADENITIS

Differential diagnosis

Sialadenitis describes inflammation of the salivary
glands. A syndrome of inflammation and necrosis is
occasionally observed in dogs. The condition leads to
enlargement of one or several glands (most frequently
the mandibular gland [Figure 8.5]). In the presence of
severe inflammation, pain and dysphagia can occur.
Therapy for sialadenitis is symptomatic and supportive.
In severe cases, surgical removal of the gland may be
indicated. A nonpainful, noninflammatory swelling has
been described in association with vomiting, and seems
to respond to phenobarbital therapy.

Other causes of salivary gland enlargement such as
inflammation (sialadenitis) and neoplasia.

SALIVARY GLAND NEOPLASIA

Clinical presentation
A large usually nonpainful mass is observed in the
upper cervical region, the pharynx, or the oral cavity
(Figure 8.4). Oral and pharyngeal sialoceles may cause
dysphagia and oral bleeding following self-trauma.
Pharyngeal and cervical mucoceles can occasionally
cause dyspnea.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and
results of fine needle aspiration of the mucocele with a
large-bore needle (blood tinged, thick mucoid fluid with
few neutrophils). Diagnostic imaging (ultrasound, sialography) can help confirm which gland is involved.
8.4

Salivary gland neoplasia occurs rarely (more frequently
in cats than in dogs). The submandibular gland is
most commonly affected. Adenocarcinoma is the most
common type.

MASTICATORY MUSCLE MYOSITIS
Definition/overview
Masticatory muscle myositis (MMM) is a common focal
inflammatory myopathy of dogs. It selectively affects the
muscles of mastication, including temporalis, ­masseter,
8.5

Figure 8.4 A ranula or sialocele affecting the sublingual
salivary gland is visible at the base of the tongue of this
dog (arrows). (Courtesy R. Husnik)

K22463_C008.indd 256

Figure 8.5 A swelling is visible in this dog with
sialadenitis of the mandibular salivary gland
(arrow). (Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

257

8.6

pterygoid, and rostral digastricus muscles, while
­sparing the spinal and limb muscles. Large breed dogs
and Cavalier King Charles Spaniels are overrepresented
among dogs with MMM.

Etiology/pathophysiology
MMM is caused by an autoimmune process directed
against type 2M (superfast) myosin and a myofibril-­
associated protein, both exclusively found in masticatory
muscle fibers.

Clinical presentation
In acute cases, clinical signs include acute swelling of the
temporalis and masseter muscles (Figure 8.6), masticatory myalgia, restricted jaw movement, pain on opening of the mouth, and exophthalmos. Muscle atrophy
and fibrosis with or without restricted jaw movement is
­present in chronically affected dogs.

Differential diagnosis
The differential diagnosis for dogs with difficulty and/
or pain on opening of the mouth is listed in Table 8.2.
Atrophy of the masticatory muscles may also occur as a
result of chronic corticosteroid therapy.

Diagnosis
A serum assay with an excellent sensitivity (85–90%) and
specificity (100%) allows detection of circulating autoantibodies against masticatory muscle type 2M fibers (http://
vetneuromuscular.ucsd.edu). Serum creatine kinase (CK)
activity may be mildly increased or normal. In acute
cases, electromyography (EMG) usually reveals abnormal
activity. Diagnostic confirmation is obtained with biopsy
of the temporalis or masseter muscle (Box 8.2) with histopathology and type 2M autoantibody immunohistochemistry. The severity of inflammation and presence of
fibrosis are assessed.

Management
Immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids should be
used (e.g. prednisone, 2 mg/kg/day) until the normal
range of jaw motion returns and serum CK, if elevated,
returns to normal. The dose should then be gradually
decreased until the lowest alternate day dose is reached
that will keep the dog free of clinical signs. This low
dose should then be continued for at least 6 months.
MMM is usually very steroid responsive; however, other
immunosuppressive agents such as azathioprine may
be added in dogs experiencing significant corticosteroid
­side-effects so that a faster weaning off of steroids is possible. Insufficient doses of corticosteroids for inadequate

K22463_C008.indd 257

Figure 8.6 German Shepherd Dog with masticatory muscle
myositis. The left masseter muscle is visibly swollen.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)
Table 8.2 Diseases causing difficulty or pain on opening of
the mouth in dogs.
Masticatory muscle myositis
Temporomandibular joint disorders: ankylosis, osteoarthritis
Retrobulbar masses: cellulitis, abscess, granuloma, neoplasia
Zygomatic arch, coronoid process: fracture
Craniomandibular osteopathy
Tetanus

Box 8.2 Practical tip on collection of temporalis
muscle biopsies.
Make sure the subcutaneous platysma muscle is incised,
the thick fascia overlying the temporalis muscle is incised
and retracted, and the temporalis muscle itself is exposed
and biopsied. The platysma muscle does not contain
type 2M fibers and is not affected by masticatory muscle
myositis.

periods of time result in relapse of the disorder and worsening of the fibrosis.

Prognosis
Prognosis is good with early diagnosis and treatment.
If diagnosis and treatment are delayed until marked
atrophy and fibrosis are present, prognosis is poor for
return of jaw function and muscle mass. Delayed ­therapy
and/or inadequate doses are common causes for poor
clinical outcome.

25/04/16 10:33 pm

258

Diseases of specific organ systems

Part 2: Diseases of the esophagus
Overview
The esophagus is a frequently forgotten part of the
­gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Esophageal diseases occur relatively commonly in dogs, but are infrequent in cats.
They may have serious implications and severely debilitate affected animals. The resulting esophageal dysfunction may lead to regurgitation of undigested food with a
high risk of food inhalation and aspiration pneumonia.
Additionally, chronic esophageal problems may lead to
undernourishment and associated complications. Foreign
bodies, strictures, and neoplasia may cause intraluminal
obstructions. Vascular abnormalities with compression of
the esophagus may also compromise the esophageal lumen.
Esophagitis is a frequent complication of esophageal diseases and of gastroesophageal reflux and vomiting. Severe
cases may result in development of strictures. Congenital
or acquired functional disorders cause esophageal dysmotility and may eventually result in megaesophagus (ME).

is conducted by the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves
to the nucleus solitarius in the brainstem. The information is processed with the help of the reticular formation
and the nucleus ambiguus, where the motor neurons are
located. These are activated and transmit impulses to the
vagus nerve.

Clinical presentation
The clinical signs consistent with esophageal disease are
summarized in Table 8.3. Regurgitation describes passive retrograde evacuation of undigested food or liquids,
and may be associated with pharyngeal or esophageal
­dysfunction. Differentiation of regurgitation and vomiting relies on several well-defined clinical parameters but
can be challenging at times (Table 8.4).

Table 8.4 Parameters that help differentiate regurgitation
from vomiting*.

Esophageal anatomy

Parameter

Regurgitation

Vomiting

The UES consists of striated muscle fibers of both
­cricopharyngeal and esophageal origin. The two spirally
arranged muscularis layers of the esophagus wind in
opposite directions. In cats, they consist of striated muscle fibers in the proximal third of the esophagus (cervical
segment), while they only contain smooth muscle fibers
in the distal two-thirds of the esophagus (thoracic segment). In contrast, the muscularis layers of the canine
esophagus are made exclusively of striated muscle fibers
over the whole length of the esophagus. The lower esophageal sphincter (LES) is a thickening of the esophageal
muscle located before the gastroesophageal junction.

Chronology

Usually occurs
immediately or
soon after food
intake, although
exceptions may
occur

May occur at any time
point, after ingesting
a meal or in between
meals

Appearance

Typically looks
like undigested
food covered with
saliva

May have many
different appearances
and look more or
less digested. The
presence of bile or
digested (dark) blood
suggests gastric origin

Normal esophageal function

Behavior

Usually occurs
without
prodromal phase

Often preceded by
nausea (frequently
with hypersalivation)

Abdominal
contractions

Usually absent

Retching typically
present

Associated
clinical signs

Dysphagia,
odynophagia,
hypersalivation,
repeated
swallowing
attempts, weight
loss if chronic

Nausea, lethargy,
anorexia, weight loss

Risk of
aspiration
pneumonia

High

Moderate

Esophageal motility is triggered by passage of a food
bolus through the pharynx (Table 8.1). Afferent impulse
Table 8.3 Clinical signs associated with esophageal diseases in
dogs and cats.
Regurgitation
Dysphagia
Swallowing attempts ‘on empty’
Halitosis
Excessive salivation
Odynophagia (esophagitis)
Anorexia/inappetence (esophagitis)
Ravenous appetite (motility disorders, megaesophagus)
Tachypnea, dyspnea, cough, exercise intolerance, fever
(aspiration pneumonia)

K22463_C008.indd 258

* Note: there may be considerable overlap in the signs associated with regurgitation and vomiting.

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

ESOPHAGEAL OBSTRUCTION

259

8.7

ESOPHAGEAL FOREIGN BODY
Esophageal FBs are a common problem in dogs while
they are ­infrequently diagnosed in cats.

Etiology
In dogs, esophageal FBs are frequently observed in small
breeds, but may occur in any size dog. The foreign material often consists of beef, pork, veal, or chicken bone(s)
coated with various amounts of connective tissue. Dog
treats swallowed with insufficient chewing have also
been reported. Fishing hooks when swallowed also get
stuck in the esophagus. Esophageal FBs are most often
located at one of three sites: thoracic inlet, heart base, or
cranial to the distal sphincter of the esophagus.

8.8

Clinical presentation
Animals are often presented with a suggestive history
(e.g. ingestion of bones, toys missing). The clinical signs
typically include regurgitation, dysorexia, excessive
drooling, odynophagia, halitosis, and retching. Additional
signs (e.g. lethargy, anorexia, dyspnea, shock associated
with systemic inflammatory response syndrome [SIRS],
or sepsis) may occur in association with complications
such as esophageal perforation with mediastinitis or
pleuritis, or aspiration pneumonia.

Differential diagnosis
Other esophageal diseases: stricture, esophagitis, ME, and
esophageal tumors. Additionally, differentiation between
clinical signs of esophageal FB and those of vomiting and
associated diseases can be difficult at times (Table 8.4).

Diagnosis
The presence of an esophageal FB is best confirmed using
chest radiographs that reveal a soft tissue mass in the
esophagus at the level of the obstruction (Figures 8.7, 8.8).
In most instances, the use of barium sulfate is not required,
and risks associated with its use can be avoided (aspiration pneumonia, damage to endoscopic equipment if
esophagoscopy is performed soon after the esophagram).
It is important to evaluate radiographs for the presence of
free air in the mediastinum and pleural effusion, as these
may indicate esophageal perforation or rupture.

Management/prevention
Treatment consists of extracting the FB under endoscopic
or fluoroscopic guidance as soon as possible (Figure 8.9).
If extraction through the oral cavity is too difficult, the

K22463_C008.indd 259

Figures 8.7, 8.8 Four-year-old male Papillon Spaniel. (8.7)
Right lateral thoracic radiograph. A large soft tissue opacity is
visible in the caudal half of the thoracic esophagus (dorsal and
ventral limits shown by arrows). Interpretation: esophageal
foreign body without indication of esophageal perforation and
pleuritis. (8.8) The ventrodorsal thoracic radiograph shows the
same soft tissue opacity in the esophagus caudal to the heart
base (arrows).

FB can be pushed into the stomach. Bone, cartilage, and
fibrous tissue material can generally be digested by gastric juice and eliminated naturally. If passage through
the pyloric canal seems impossible, gastrotomy and
extraction of the FB is performed.

25/04/16 10:33 pm

260

Diseases of specific organ systems

8.9

Figure 8.9 Esophagoscopy showing a bone foreign body in
the caudal thoracic esophagus.

In case of esophageal perforation or rupture, a surgical approach is generally necessary. If severe esophageal mucosal lesions are present following extraction, a
­24–48-hour fasting period is recommended. In the most
severe cases, endoscopic placement of a regular or low profile gastrostomy tube is required to provide nutrition without compromising mucosal healing for the period following
FB removal. Additionally, treatment of esophagitis and prevention of gastroesophageal reflux and further esophageal
mucosal damage is recommended (see Esophagitis).
Access to bones or disproportionately large pieces of
meat that are unlikely to reach the stomach should be
limited if the dog does not chew them. Five to six ml of
water should be administered with a syringe after pilling
cats with any drug, but particularly doxycycline and clindamycin tablets.

Prognosis
Generally, the prognosis for esophageal FB after nonsurgical removal is good to excellent. Esophagitis is present
in up to 80% of dogs after FB removal (Figure 8.10), but
seems to resolve relatively rapidly. Esophageal strictures
are a feared complication that may develop over time, particularly in dogs with severe esophageal mucosal lesions.

K22463_C008.indd 260

8.10

Figure 8.10 Endoscopic view of moderate esophageal
mucosal lesions located cranial to the lower esophageal
sphincter after removal of an esophageal foreign body in
a dog. (Courtesy R. Husnik)

BENIGN ESOPHAGEAL STRICTURE
Strictures occur less commonly than FBs in dogs and
in cats.

Etiology/pathophysiology
Benign strictures are a complication of severe esopha­
gitis (FB, gastroesophageal reflux, dry swallow of pills
to cats, ingestion of caustic substances). They occur with
deep inflammation when lesions extend to the submucosa and muscularis layers of the esophageal wall.
They are characterized by excessive scar tissue formation
with narrowing of the esophageal lumen and result­ing
partial or total obstruction.

Clinical presentation
The history often reveals esophageal disease (for instance
esophageal FB) or general anesthesia (with gastroesophageal reflux) prior to the development of signs. The animal
shows frequent regurgitation, which can be associated
with a particular food consistency. A dog with esophageal
stricture may regurgitate dry food but not a puréed diet.
Moreover, the clinical signs typical of esophagitis may
also be present.

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

Differential diagnosis

261

Thoracic radiographs are useful to rule out other causes of
esophageal obstruction (e.g. esophageal FB, external compression). Diagnosis is confirmed either by esophagoscopy
(Figure 8.11) or contrast esophagram. Administration of
contrast agents may lead to aspiration pneumonia, and
may damage endoscopic equipment if an esophagoscopy
is performed soon after the contrast study. If esophageal
perforation is suspected, and an esophagram is indispensable, low osmolar iodinated contrast agents are preferred
over barium sulfate. It is essential to differentiate stricture of the esophageal lumen from external compression.

pneumonia is a common complication. Affected puppies
are generally hungry and with time become malnourished
and lose weight. Diagnosis relies on the typical history and
clinical signs, and is confirmed with thoracic radiographs
that reveal esophageal dilation cranial to the heart base
and deviation of the trachea to the left, cranial to the cardiac silhouette that is visible on ventrodorsal or dorsoventral views (Figures 8.15–8.17). Treatment of vascular ring
anomalies consists of thoracotomy and transection of the
compressive fibrous band. Prognosis of PRAA is generally
good after surgery. In some cases, normal motility may not
return if the cervical esophagus was very dilated or if an
esophageal diverticulum was formed. While most dogs are
reported to do well, some may need continuous support
such as upright feeding (see Megaesophagus, Management).

Management

esophageal tumors

See Esophageal foreign body.

Diagnosis

Treatment involves dilating the stricture(s) under
­endoscopic or fluoroscopic control using balloons of different diameters (Figures 8.12, 8.13) or ‘bougies’ of different sizes. Multiple sessions at intervals of 1–2 weeks are
often necessary. Submucosal injection of triamcinolone
at the level of the stricture prior to dilation or bougienage can help reduce the number of procedures required
(Figure 8.14). Drug therapy is similar to that for e­ sophagitis
(see below). Systemic administration of prednisone/prednisolone is ineffective. Esophageal stenting is an option to
consider in cases refractory to dilation attempts.

Prognosis
Without treatment, the prognosis is poor to grave due to
the risk of aspiration pneumonia and malnutrition. After
stricture dilation, the prognosis is guarded to good: several dilation attempts may be required to ­re-establish
patency of the lumen for a normal size food bolus.
In some instances, patency can only be partially restored,
thus requiring liquid or moist food (and not dry kibbles)
to be fed. Occasional regurgitation episodes may not be
avoidable.

OTHER CAUSES OF OBSTRUCTION
vascular ring anomalies
Vascular ring anomalies cause entrapment of the esophagus
at the level of the heart base. The most common vascular
ring anomaly is persistent right aortic arch (PRAA), which
is characterized by the presence of a fibrous band that connects the main pulmonary artery and the anomalous aorta
and causes extraluminal compression and entrapment of
the esophagus. Regurgitation typically occurs when puppies or kittens are weaned to solid food, and aspiration

K22463_C008.indd 261

Esophageal tumors occur rarely. Leiomyoma is the most
common benign neoplasm in dogs, and often occurs in
the caudal esophagus. Fibrosarcoma and osteosarcoma
may develop in dogs infected with Spirocerca lupi (see
below). Other tumors include leiomyosarcoma, lymphoma, and metastatic lymphoma. The most common
primary esophageal neoplasia of cats is SCC. Clinical signs
may be very discrete unless the tumor causes significant
luminal obstruction. Diagnosis relies on radiographs,
which may show ­esophageal dilation cranial to the mass.
A contrast esophagram may be helpful. Esophagoscopy is
required for final confirmation, with collection of biopsies for histopathologic analysis. Tumor excision with
esophageal resection and anastomosis can be attempted,
but the surgical procedure may be associated with postoperative morbidity. Esophageal stenting is a palliative
option to consider.

ESOPHAGITIS
Definition/overview
Esophagitis is a disease characterized by inflammation of
the esophageal mucosa. It may occur in dogs and cats, and
mild cases may go unnoticed.

Etiology/pathophysiology
Noninfectious inflammation
The esophageal mucosa may easily be damaged by gastric acid and bile in gastroesophageal reflux disease, as
gastric acid induces the formation of p
­ roinflammatory
cytokines in the esophageal mucosa (Figure 8.18).
­
Esophagitis may be a complication of LES relaxation
during general anesthesia. Esophagitis may also occur in
animals with frequent and severe vomiting. In addition,

25/04/16 10:33 pm

262

Diseases of specific organ systems

8.11

8.12

8.13

8.14

Figures 8.11–8.14 Esophageal stricture in a 3-year-old female spayed Golden Retriever with a 2-week history of regurgitation. The
regurgitation was attributed to severe reflux esophagitis associated with an intestinal foreign body and concurrent pancreatitis.
Note the narrowed esophageal diameter due to a fibrous ring. (8.11) A balloon catheter filled with saline is in place to dilate the
stricture. (8.12) The dog after balloon dilation of the stricture. (8.13) There is a tear in the dorsal esophageal mucosa exposing the
underlying structures (arrows). Esophageal tear and perforation are possible complications of stricture dilation. A conservative
approach is indispensable during dilation attempts with increasing balloon sizes. (8.14) 0.5 ml triamcinolone acetate 20 mg/ml was
injected submucosally in four sites at the base of the stricture (arrows).

K22463_C008.indd 262

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

263

8.17

8.15

Figure 8.17 Contrast esophagram of a dog with a persistent
right aortic arch. The dilated esophageal pouch located in the
cranial mediastinum is clearly visible.
8.16
8.18

Figures 8.15, 8.16 A 3-month-old German Shepherd Dog
with a persistent right aortic arch. (8.15) Lateral radiograph.
The dilated esophagus is seen as a soft tissue opacity in the
cranial mediastinum that displaces the trachea ventrally. Note
the presence of granular material in the dilated esophagus
cranial to the cardiac silhouette (arrow). (8.16) Ventrodorsal
radiograph. The dilated esophagus is recognizable as a
structure of soft tissue density in the cranial mediastinum
(white arrows). Note the deviation of the trachea to the left
cranial to the heart base (arrows).

esophageal FBs and swallowing of caustic substances may
cause esophageal mucosal inflammation. In cats, administration of doxycycline, clindamycin, and other drugs in

K22463_C008.indd 263

Figure 8.18 Esophagoscopy showing severely inflamed
esophageal mucosa surrounding the lower esophageal
sphincter due to gastroesophageal reflux. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

the form of oral tablets without subsequent water flush
may cause severe esophagitis and possibly esophageal
stricture.

Infectious inflammation
In endemic areas (worldwide tropical and subtropical
regions), Spirocerca lupi is a common cause of esophagitis.
The ingested larvae migrate extensively and eventually
mature into adults after a prepatent period of 3–9 months.

25/04/16 10:33 pm

264

Diseases of specific organ systems

The adult worms generally inhabit the esophageal
­submucosa and adventitia, and cause the formation of
granulomatous nodules of less than 1 cm to more than 4 cm
diameter in the caudal esophageal wall. Esophageal infections with the oomycetal agent Pythium insidiosum occur
infrequently in endemic areas (worldwide tropical and
subtropical regions), and may cause severe esophagitis.

8.19

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs are characteristic of esophageal diseases
(Table 8.3). Mild cases of esophagitis may remain subclinical or mild signs may go unnoticed by the owners.

Differential diagnosis
Includes all the other esophageal diseases described in
this chapter.

Diagnosis
A tentative clinical diagnosis is made on the basis of
clinical signs and history. Confirmation of diagnosis and
assessment of the extent and severity of lesions requires
endoscopic examination. Collection of esophageal wall
biopsies is often challenging, but histologic evaluation
may yield additional information on the cause of the
esophagitis. For the diagnosis of spirocercosis, diagnostic tests have the following sensitivities: esophagoscopy
100% (Figure 8.19), presence of parasite ova on fecal
flotation 80%, and radiographic detection of esophageal
nodules 50%. Diagnosis of esophageal pythiosis relies on
histopathology and immunochemical stains of esophageal biopsies. The typical esophageal wall thickening
with involvement of local lymph nodes may be apparent
on thoracic radiographs, ultrasound, and CT (Figure 8.20).
An ELISA test for serum antibodies is available.

8.20

Management
Symptomatic treatment of esophagitis is focused on protection of the mucosa against further damage and facilitation of mucosal healing. Fasting for 24–48 hours is
recommended, if feasible without compromising the dog’s
condition. In severe cases, placement of a gastrostomy
tube via endoscopy or surgery is beneficial to provide
enteral nutrition and prevent complications associated
with malnutrition. A diet low in fat is recommended
because high fat diets may be associated with increased
episodes of gastroesophageal reflux.
Sucralfate suspension is used to promote mucosal
­healing (1 g q8h for large dogs, 0.5 g q8h for smaller dogs).
Inhibitors of gastric acid secretion, preferably a proton
pump inhibitor such as omeprazole (1mg/kg PO q12h),
and a prokinetic agent that accelerates gastric emptying
(metoclopramide, 0.5 mg/kg PO, SC q8h, or CRI of 1–2 mg/kg

K22463_C008.indd 264

Figures 8.19, 8.20 Mixed-breed dog with dysphagia and
esophageal obstruction. (8.19) Esophagoscopy shows an
irregular mucosal surface. (8.20) Post-contrast CT scan of the
cranial mediastinum. The esophageal wall is severely and
irregularly thickened (white arrow, serosal surface; black arrow,
mucosal surface covered with a fine layer of barium; asterisk,
trachea). (Courtesy LSU SVM Diagnostic Imaging Service)

over 24h) or promotes gastric emptying and increases the
distal esophageal sphincter tone (cisapride, 0.5–1 mg/kg
PO q8h) should be administered, preferably 30–60 minutes before meals.
Treatment of spirocercosis consists in administration
of specific parasiticides. Doramectin is an avermectin

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

licensed for use in cattle but used off-label in dogs.
Recommended protocols include 0.2–0.4 mg/kg SC every
14 days for 3–6 injections, or 0.5 mg/kg PO q24h for
6 weeks. These very high doses of avermectins must not
be administered to Collies and other herding breeds that
are prone to develop potentially lethal central nervous
complications due to a mutation in the MDR-1 gene.
Treatment of esophageal pythiosis is challenging.
Surgical excision of the lesion with safe tissue margins
is the preferred treatment of GI pythiosis but is not feasible in the esophagus. Medical treatment of unresectable
pythiosis is often unrewarding (itraconazole, 10 mg/kg
PO q24h and terbinafine, 5–10 mg/kg PO q24h). Antiinflammatory doses of prednisone can be used in the
hope of decreasing local inflammation and to palliate
clinical signs.

Prognosis
Noninfectious inflammation
Mild and moderate cases generally have a good prognosis. Severe inflammatory mucosal lesions may lead to
esophageal stricture development.

Infectious inflammation
Esophageal neoplasia (osteosarcoma, fibrosarcoma) is a
common complication of S. lupi infection and requires a
surgical approach if the mass significantly obstructs the
esophageal lumen. Esophageal pythiosis carries a poor to
grave prognosis.

MEGAESOPHAGUS
Definition/overview
ME is characterized by generalized dilatation of the
esophagus. It is the most common cause of regurgitation
and a common esophageal disease in dogs, but is a rare
occurrence in cats.

Etiology
Congenital ME occurs in puppies and rarely in kittens,
while acquired ME is seen mostly in middle aged to older
adult animals. The diseases frequently associated with
ME in the dog are listed in Table 8.5. Among those, idiopathic ME and ME secondary to focal myasthenia gravis
(MG) are most common. Acquired ME is also a feature of
feline and canine dysautonomia.

Pathophysiology
With the exception of focal MG, the pathogenesis of canine
and feline ME has not been fully elucidated. In dogs
with MG, autoantibodies are formed against nicotinic

K22463_C008.indd 265

265

acetylcholine receptors located at the neuromuscular
junction in striated muscle. MG is discussed in further
detail in Chapter 12 (Disorders of the nervous system
and muscle). Congenital ME and other forms of acquired
ME most likely result from malformation or changes in
the complex neural network responsible for esophageal
innervation.
Miniature Schnauzers, Fox Terriers, German Shepherd
Dogs, Great Danes, Irish Setters, Labrador Retrievers, Shar
Peis, and Newfoundlands are at increased risk for development of primary idiopathic ME.

Clinical presentation
The clinical signs are similar to those of other ­esophageal
diseases (Table 8.3), and regurgitation is the most
­frequent complaint in dogs with ME. Secondary esophagitis is a common complication. The risk of aspiration pneumonia is high; accordingly, affected animals may present
with exercise intolerance, cough, tachypnea, and dyspnea.

Differential diagnosis
Includes all the other esophageal diseases described in
this chapter.

Diagnosis
The first step in the diagnostic approach is to rule out
esophageal obstruction (FB, stricture) by taking a detailed
history and obtaining good quality thoracic radiographs.
A generalized dilatation of the esophagus is usually easily identified on the thoracic films (Figures 8.21, 8.22). It
is important to carefully check for aspiration pneumonia
in these patients. This is best done by thoroughly examining the distal parts of the lung lobes, in particular the
right middle, and left and right cranial lobes for presence
of interstitial or alveolar infiltrate (Figure 8.22).
Table 8.5 Causes of megaesophagus in the dog.
Congenital megaesophagus:
•• Congenital myasthenia gravis
•• Congenital neuropathy
Acquired megaesophagus:
•• Idiopathic megaesophagus
•• Myasthenia gravis
•• Esophagitis
•• Endocrine diseases (hypoadrenocorticism, possibly
hypothyroidism)
•• Toxicosis (e.g. lead toxicity)
•• Polymyositis, polyneuropathy
•• Less common causes: other neurologic diseases
(botulism, tetanus, dysautonomia, rabies), systemic lupus
erythematosus

25/04/16 10:33 pm

266

Diseases of specific organ systems

8.21

8.22

biochemistry panel (including serum CK), and u
­ rinalysis
is r­ecommended. Next, screening for endocrinopathies
(adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH] stimulation test,
­
possibly serum thyroxine and endogenous thyroid-­
stimulating hormone [TSH]), and a search for opacities in
the cranial mediastinum (looking for possible thymoma
associated with MG) are recommended. A sensitive and
specific serum assay documenting the presence of autoantibodies against nicotinic acetylcholine receptors is
available for the diagnosis of MG (http://vetneuromuscular.ucsd.edu). Endoscopic examination of the esophagus
may be useful in unclear cases and to allow visualization
of the extent and severity of the esophagitis, if present.
In cases with suspected polymyositis or polyneuropathy,
electrodiagnostics (EMG, nerve conduction studies) and
collection of muscle and nerve biopsies for histopathologic evaluation should be considered.

Management

Figures 8.21, 8.22 Nine-year-old female spayed Basset
Hound with megaesophagus due to focal myasthenia gravis.
(8.21) Right lateral radiograph. The white arrows point to the
dorsal and ventral walls of the esophagus, which are both
clearly visible. The black arrow points to summation of the
dorsal tracheal and ventral esophageal walls (tracheal stripe
sign). (8.22) Ventrolateral radiograph. The walls of the dilated
esophagus are clearly visible in the caudal mediastinum. Air
bronchograms within the circle are indicative of aspiration
pneumonia in the caudal subsegment of the left cranial
lung lobe.

The systematic approach is continued by screening animals for primary diseases associated with secondary ME. A minimal database consisting of CBC,

K22463_C008.indd 266

Dietary management is essential. It is important to try
various options such as dry food kibbles, canned food
formed into meat balls, and food blended with water in
different consistencies (thick or thin slurry) because each
animal may respond differently. Dogs and cats with ME
should be fed a calorie-dense diet in a vertical position
and be maintained in that position for 10–15 minutes
after the meal in order to use gravity to facilitate aboral
movement of the food bolus. Small dogs can be held on
a person’s lap for that time. Medium size and large dogs
can be fed on stairs and maintained with their forelimbs
higher than their hindlimbs. The Bailey chair is a useful
device to keep medium size and large dogs in a vertical
position during and after meals (Figure 8.23). This aspect
of treatment can be a challenge for dogs with pre-existing
orthopedic diseases such as coxofemoral arthritis.
In severe cases, placement of a gastrostomy tube may
be beneficial to ensure appropriate nutrition and timely
delivery of oral medications to the stomach, and to prevent aspiration pneumonia.
Identified underlying diseases need to be treated. For
instance, the recommended treatment of MG includes
administration of the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor
­pyridostigmine (1–3 mg/kg PO q12h, start with a low dose
to minimize risk of cholinergic crisis) and immunosuppressive doses of prednisone or prednisolone (1–2 mg/kg
PO q12h).
Cisapride and erythromycin increase LES tone in dogs;
however, gastric prokinetic drugs do not significantly
influence esophageal motility. Bethanechol is a cholinergic agent that has been shown to increase esophageal
motility in some dogs and can be used in the management
of clinical cases of idiopathic ME (5–15 mg/dog PO q8h,

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

267

8.23
Box 8.3 Practical tip for support of owners of dogs with
megaesophagus.
The management of dogs with megaesophagus requires
considerable dedication from the pet’s owners and can
be overwhelming at times. Clients should be made aware
of the existence of support groups on the internet (type
‘megaesophagus support group’ in your favorite search
engine). These groups provide useful tips to optimize the
quality of homecare and to make it possible for owners to
include these new tasks in their busy daily routines.

2 years, and 22% survived for 5 years. Identified risk factors for shorter survival were dogs older than 13 months
of age at the time of diagnosis and presence of aspiration
pneumonia at diagnosis. ME may be reversible when
associated with endocrinopathies, but this represents
only a small percentage of dogs with ME.

LESS COMMON ESOPHAGEAL DISEASES

Figure 8.23 A 10-year-old female spayed Border Collie with
idiopathic megaesophagus eating in a custom-made Bailey’s
chair. The dog is kept in an upright position in the chair for
20 minutes after each meal.

start with a low dose to minimize risk of cholinergic
crisis). Because of the high prevalence of esophagitis in
patients with ME, sucralfate suspension should be administered to facilitate mucosal healing (0.5–1.0 g/dog q8h,
0.25–0.5 g/cat q8–12h). Treatment of aspiration pneumonia is mostly supportive. If secondary bacterial infection
is suspected, antibiotic treatment is best based on culture
and sensitivity from a bronchial wash; however, empiric
treatment with a broad-spectrum antibiotic may be necessary in some cases (e.g. amoxicillin and clavulanic acid,
ampicillin and sulbactam).
Home management of pets with ME is complex and
time-consuming. Owners may feel overwhelmed and
discouraged at first. Therefore, optimal communication
between the veterinary care team and the animal’s owners is essential for successful management of this condition (Box 8.3).

Prognosis
Recent studies from Scotland and Germany reported a
short median survival time of 3 months after diagnosis
regardless of the etiology in dogs with ME. In the Glasgow
study, only 41% of dogs survived 1 year, 31% were alive at

K22463_C008.indd 267

Esophageal diverticulum is defined as a circumscribed
outpouching of the esophageal wall that may be congenital or acquired. Congenital diverticula result from abnormal embryologic development of the esophagus. Acquired
diverticula are classified as either traction (resulting from
periesophageal inflammation) or pulsion forms (resulting
from increased esophageal luminal pressure). Esophageal
diverticula generally appear in three locations: pharyngo‑
esophageal, midthoracic, or caudal thoracic. The accumulation of ingesta within diverticula leads to esophagitis
with disturbed esophageal motility and possibly obstruction. The clinical signs are typical of esophageal disease
(Table 8.3). Plain radiographs should be evaluated for
the presence of an air- or food-filled soft tissue density
representing the impacted diverticulum, signs of aspiration pneumonia, and/or esophageal ­dilation. A positive
contrast esophagram usually demonstrates a deviation
or outpouching of the esophageal lumen. Small diverticula may be managed medically by feeding a soft, bland
diet with the animal in an upright position to avoid food
accumulation in the pouch. Large diverticula generally
require excision and reconstruction of the esophageal
wall. Prognosis is good if the diverticulum is uncomplicated by lung adhesions, abscesses, or bronchoesophageal
fistulas.
Esophageal fistula is an abnormal communication
between the esophageal lumen and surrounding structures. The most common fistula in the dog is the bronchoesophageal fistula (BEF) due to trauma caused by a
retained sharp esophageal FB. Most canine BEFs due to

25/04/16 10:33 pm

268

Diseases of specific organ systems

an esophageal FB connect the esophagus with either the
right caudal or the middle lung lobe bronchus. Physical
examination may reveal coughing, dyspnea, respiratory
crackles over affected lung regions, hemoptysis, anorexia,
depression, weight loss, regurgitation, and dysphagia.
Coughing associated with drinking liquids is a sign frequently associated with BEF. Survey thoracic radiographs
may reveal radiopaque foreign bodies in the esophagus
or bronchus, pulmonary consolidation, pleural fluid
accumulation, or localized interstitial, alveolar, and/or
bronchial lung patterns. Contrast esophagram or esophagoscopy is required for definitive diagnosis. Treatment
consists of thoracotomy and surgical correction of the fistulous tract. Lung lobectomy may be necessary if extensive pulmonary lesions are present. Prognosis ranges
from good to guarded depending on the preoperative
condition of the patient, the ability to resolve pulmonary
infection, and the success of surgery.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is confirmed with survey thoracic r­ adiographs
(Figure 8.24) and positive contrast esophagram
(Figure 8.25) to confirm the type of HH. Sliding hernias
may not be visible at the time of the examination, and
fluoroscopy may be required for confirmation. The HH

8.24

HIATAL HERNIA
Definition/overview
Hiatal hernia involves herniation of parts of the stomach
through the esophageal hiatus into the mediastinum.
Four types of hiatal hernias (HHs) have been described in
people, and most cases documented in dogs and cats are
type I or sliding HH.

Figure 8.24 Right lateral thoracic radiograph of a 1-year-old
male French Bulldog with hiatal hernia. The stomach is not in
a normal anatomic position within the abdomen (black arrow)
and is displaced cranially into the caudal thorax and confluent
with the soft tissue opacity in the region of the esophagus
(white arrows). (Courtesy LSU SVM Diagnostic Imaging Service)

Etiology/pathogenesis
Type I HHs are usually due to a congenital weakness of
the esophageal hiatus. They have been reported most
frequently in Shar Peis and English Bulldogs and also in
cats. Acquired type I HH may occur following trauma or
in combination with obstructive upper respiratory disease and abnormally high negative intrathoracic pressure during inspiration, such as may occur in dogs with
­brachycephalic syndrome and laryngeal paralysis.

8.25

Clinical presentation
Common clinical signs are due to the secondary reflux
esophagitis and include regurgitation, hypersalivation,
vomiting, dysphagia, dyspnea, anorexia, and weight loss.
Puppies and kittens are presented at the time of ­weaning
to solid food, but onset of clinical signs can also be delayed
into adulthood. Aspiration pneumonia is possible and
affected animals may show typical respiratory signs.

Differential diagnosis
Esophageal diseases, in particular esophageal obstruction (FB, stricture), vascular ring anomaly in puppies, and
acute or chronic gastritis.

K22463_C008.indd 268

Figure 8.25 Right lateral view from a 6-year-old male neutered
Welsh Corgi with dysphagia and sliding hiatal hernia. The arrows
show the dorsal and ventral walls of the herniated stomach.

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

269

8.26

may also be viewed using ultrasound from an ­abdominal
approach. Esophagoscopy allows visualization of the
extent and severity of the esophagitis.

Mucous cells

Management
Medical management is aimed at treating the secondary
esophagitis and protecting esophageal mucosa from further damage (see Esophagitis, Management). A 30-day
trial of medical therapy is often recommended prior to
making plans for surgical correction as it may cause clinical signs to abate with restitution of adequate quality of
life in a significant proportion of dogs. However, medical treatment was not successful in a series of Shar Peis
presented before the age of 5 months, and surgery was
recommended with no delay in such puppies. Surgical
techniques include reduction of the abnormal diaphragmatic hiatus (phrenoplasty), esophagopexy, and leftsided gastropexy used alone or in combination. Clinical
signs may persist after surgical reduction until resolution
of secondary esophagitis.

Parietal cells

Chief cells

Endocrine cells

Figure 8.26 Schematic representation of the microscopic
anatomy of a canine gastric gland.

Prognosis
Prognosis for dogs and cats with HH is generally good.
Animals that respond to medical management will probably require long-term treatment (continuous or intermittent). If medical treatment fails, surgical correction
has a favorable outcome in most cases.

Normal gastric function
Acid and enzyme production

Gastric diseases are common in dogs and cats. The
­stomach plays a key role in the digestive process through
gastric acid and pepsinogen production. It functions both
as a storage organ (fundus and body) and as a grinder
(antrum), reducing the size of food particles until they are
small enough to pass through the pyloric sphincter, and
be further processed in the small intestine.

While unstimulated gastric acid production is minimal in dogs and cats, postprandial acid production is
­considerable, with gastric acidity reaching a pH as low as
1 or less. Acid is produced in the parietal cells in response
to three types of stimuli: activation of histamine type 2
receptors by histamine produced by neighboring entero‑
chromaffin-like cells; muscarinic type 3 receptors activated by vagal nerve endings; or gastrin receptors (also
called CCK type 2 receptors) activated by gastrin produced by antral G-cells (Figure 8.27). Enzyme secretion
is limited to pepsinogen, released by chief cells and broken down to the proteolytic enzyme pepsin, and gastric
lipase.

Gastric anatomy

Gastric motility

The stomach can be divided into five anatomic parts:
­cardia, fundus, body, pyloric antrum, and pylorus. The
mucosa of the fundus and body folds into countless
gastric glands that are lined with cells responsible for
secretion of acid (parietal cells), mucus (neck cells), pepsinogen (chief cells), and GI hormones (endocrine cells)
(Figure 8.26). The pyloric mucosa is thinner, and contains
a lower density of glands. Pyloric glands mostly consist of mucous cells and endocrine cells (many of them
­producing gastrin).

After ingestion of solid food, the gastric antrum acts as
a pump from which peristaltic waves originate while
the gastric body acts as a high compliance reservoir. The
mechanical action of the antral pump is divided into
three phases: (1) propulsion, (2) emptying of fine particles
into the duodenum and mixing, and (3) retropulsion of
particles >1–2 mm for continued grinding. In dogs, complete emptying of the stomach is followed by synchronized housekeeping contractions (phase III migratory
motor complexes).

Part 3: Diseases of the stomach
Overview

K22463_C008.indd 269

25/04/16 10:33 pm

270

Diseases of specific organ systems

8.27

Hypokalemia may occur as well due to potassium loss associated with vomiting and metabolic alkalosis.

HCI

Differential diagnosis

Proton pump
inhibitors

Active H–/
K+ ATPase
CCK-B
rec.
M3
rec.

Gastrin

Nucleus
H2
rec.

Diagnosis
H2 histamine
receptor blockers

Acetylcholine

Other diseases causing sudden onset vomiting such as GI
FB, acute pancreatitis, endocrine diseases (e.g. hypoadrenocorticism, diabetic ketoacidosis), acute kidney injury
(e.g. toxicosis with ethylene glycol or grapes/raisins,
Easter lily, leptospirosis), acute hepatitis, cholangitis, or
cholecystitis.

Histamine

Figure 8.27 Schematic representation of a canine parietal cell.
Apical proton pumps actively secrete protons into the glandular
lumen under stimulation by one of three basolateral receptors:
CCK-B (gastrin), M3 (acetylcholine), and histamine type 2. The
site of action of proton pump inhibitors and H2 histamine
receptor blockers is illustrated.

GASTRITIS
ACUTE GASTRITIS
Definition/overview
Acute gastritis is a clinical syndrome that occurs c­ ommonly
in dogs and occasionally in cats. The diagnosis is rarely
confirmed histopathologically, and affected animals are
usually treated symptomatically with good success.

Etiology

History and clinical signs are usually suggestive.
Abdominal radiographs should be obtained in order
to rule out the presence of a GI FB. Underlying diseases
should be ruled out, particularly in older animals or in
atypical cases, with the help of a minimal database (CBC,
serum biochemistry, urinalysis).

Management
Treatment is mostly symptomatic and consists of
­antiemetics, parenteral fluids to correct fluid and electrolyte deficits, and analgesia with opiates in case of
abdominal pain. Animals usually benefit from a short
fast (12 hours) until vomiting has subsided, followed by
frequent feedings of small quantities of an easily digestible bland food (e.g. boiled chicken and rice, or commercial prescription food) for 2–3 days. Once the animal feels
better, the usual diet can be reintroduced progressively
over 2–3 days.

Prognosis
Most dogs and cats with acute gastritis respond very well
to symptomatic treatment. In cases with severe underlying conditions, the prognosis of the primary disease is
determinant.

The most common cause of acute gastric inflammation is
dietary indiscretion or food intolerance. Other common
causes include gastric FBs (including hairballs), drugs
(e.g. antibiotics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
[NSAIDs]), toxins (plant material, bleach, cleaners, heavy
metals), bacteria (Helicobacter spp.), toxins, and viruses.
Additionally, acute gastritis may also be associated with
diseases primarily affecting other organs (e.g. hypoadrenocorticism, acute kidney injury, acute hepatitis, cholangitis, cholecystitis).

Chronic gastritis is a common disease in dogs with
­clinical signs such as chronic vomiting. Histopathologic
lesions of gastric inflammation can also be present in
­significant numbers of asymptomatic dogs. The prevalence of chronic gastritis in cats has not been established.

Clinical presentation

Etiology

Sudden-onset vomiting, possibly associated with ­dysorexia
and lethargy. Hematemesis may occur as well. The history may reveal exposure to spoiled food, drugs, or toxins.
Untreated animals become dehydrated and hypovolemic.

Possible causes of chronic gastritis include infectious
agents or parasites, drugs (see Gastric ulcers and erosions),
or chronic FBs (see Gastric outlet obstruction). In many
cases, a specific cause cannot be identified and the term

K22463_C008.indd 270

CHRONIC GASTRITIS
Definition/overview

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

idiopathic gastritis is used. Food intolerance or allergy,
occult parasitism, or other mechanisms are thought to
play a role in the pathogenesis of idiopathic gastritis.
Ollulanus tricuspis is the small gastric worm that infests
the feline stomach. It is 0.7–1 cm in length and is transmitted directly from cat to cat through ingestion of vomitus. Depending on the severity of the infestation, cats
may remain subclinical or show severe signs of chronic
gastritis. Physaloptera spp. are larger (2–6 cm long) and
may be found in dogs and cats (Figure 8.28), although
their final host appears to be the coyote. Pythium insidiosum is an oomycetal microorganism that may infect
the canine GI tract in subtropical climates (such as the
Southeast and Gulf of Mexico regions of the USA) and
sporadically in other areas. Young, large breed dogs with
access to the outdoors are most commonly affected and
typically vomit regularly without losing their appetite.
Gastric pythiosis is characterized by severe transmural
antral thickening and possible gastric outflow obstruction, and may be difficult to differentiate from gastric
antral neoplasia. Helicobacter infection is discussed in
further detail below.

Clinical presentation
Chronic or chronic-intermittent vomiting of food and/
or bile is the main clinical sign associated with chronic
gastritis. Depending on the severity of the disease, varying combinations of hyporexia, weight loss, melena, or
hematemesis may be observed.

Differential diagnosis

271

not very helpful for diagnosis of Ollulanus or Physaloptera.
In dogs with history, physical e­ xamination, and abdominal imaging findings suggestive of gastric pythiosis,
serum ELISA documenting the presence of specific antibodies may be helpful. In cases refractory to symptomatic
treatment, gastroscopy allows visualization of the gastric lesions (Figure 8.29) and collection of gastric mucosal biopsies, which are evaluated histopathologically.
The duodenum should also be evaluated and biopsied
since gastric diseases may extend to the small intestine as
well. Lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates are the most common,
but infiltrates may also consist of eosinophils or other
inflammatory cells. Eosinophilic gastritis may reflect the
presence of parasites or allergic processes. In cats, it may
be part of the feline hypereosinophilic syndrome.

Management
Symptomatic treatment is initiated with antiemetics
(see Chapter 2.4: Vomiting), and protection of the gastric mucosa (Table 8.6). In addition, identified underlying diseases also need to be addressed. In dogs and cats
with unexplained gastritis, empirical treatment with
broad-spectrum anthelminthics such as fenbendazole
(50 mg/kg q24h for 5 days [Ollulanus and Physaloptera
spp.]) or pyrantel pamoate (5–10 mg/kg [Physaloptera
spp.]) may be warranted.
Regardless of the cause of the chronic gastritis, a sensible dietary approach is necessary. Obtaining a good
8.28

All diseases that may cause chronic vomiting need to be
considered. These include chronic enteropathies (vomiting and hyporexia may be the only signs of inflammatory
bowel disease [IBD] in cats), chronic pancreatitis, chronic
diseases of the liver and biliary tree, chronic kidney disease, and endocrinopathies (dog: hypoadrenocorticism,
cat: hyperthyroidism).

Diagnosis
A minimum database consisting of CBC, biochemistry
panel, and urinalysis is useful to assess the presence of
underlying conditions with secondary gastritis and the
systemic impact of gastritis. For instance, eosinophilia
may be suggestive of parasites, allergic reactions, or mast
cell tumor. Hypoalbuminemia may occur with severe GI
bleeding or with concurrent small intestinal involvement.
Abdominal radiographs may reveal delayed gastric emptying (presence of food in the stomach after a 12-hour
fast). Abdominal ultrasound is useful to assess antral wall
thickness and overall gastric motility. Fecal flotation is

K22463_C008.indd 271

Figure 8.28 Endoscopic view of a Physalloptera worm (arrow)
found in the gastric mucosa of a young adult male dog with
chronic vomiting. (Courtesy K. Harkin)

25/04/16 10:33 pm

272

Diseases of specific organ systems

8.29

Figure 8.29 Gastroscopic view of a dog with chronic vomiting
and hyporexia after endoscopic extraction of a plastic foreign
body. The pyloric antrum can be seen below the incisura
angularis (asterisk). The antral mucosa looks thickened (white
arrow) and there are multiple mucosal erosions (black arrow).
(Courtesy R. Husnik)

dietary history is helpful. For idiopathic chronic g
­ astritis,
the recommended diets are based on novel proteins or
hydrolyzed peptides. They should be easily digestible
and fed in several small meals throughout the day to
optimize gastric emptying. Dietary management may be
sufficient in mild cases with few or no systemic signs, and
improvement generally occurs within 2 weeks of receiving the new diet. If this is not the case, a different diet
may be tried for another 2 weeks, or immunosuppressive
therapy may be initiated. In moderate and severe cases,
immunosuppressive doses of glucocorticoids are often
­
required (e.g. prednisone, 1–2 mg/kg q24h for 2 weeks,
then slowly taper in 2-week steps to every other day, or
lowest effective dose over 8–12 weeks). Additional immunosuppressives may be required in refractory cases.
GI pythiosis is best managed with surgical resection of
the lesion with sufficient margins. This is often difficult
to achieve in the stomach. Medical treatment of unresectable pythiosis is often unrewarding (itraconazole,
10 mg/kg PO q24h; terbinafine, 5–10 mg/kg PO q24h).
Anti-inflammatory doses of prednisone can be used in
the hope of decreasing local inflammation and to palliate
clinical signs.

Prognosis
All identifiable causes and underlying diseases should be
addressed and properly managed. Idiopathic chronic gastritis generally has a fair to good prognosis.

HELICOBACTER SPP. INFECTION
Table 8.6 Recommended dosages for inhibitors of gastric acid
production, prostaglandin analogs, and sucralfate.
Drug

Dog

Cat

Omeprazole

0.7–1.0 mg/kg PO q12–24h

Same

Pantoprazole

0.7–1.0 mg/kg PO q12–24h

Same

Ranitidine*

1–2 mg/kg PO, SC, IV q12h;
use low end of range if renal
azotemia present

Same

Famotidine*

0.5 mg/kg PO, IV q12h; if renal
azotemia is present q24h

Same

Misoprostol

2–5 µg/kg PO q8–12h

Unknown

Sucralfate

0.5–1 g PO q8–12h

0.25–0.5 g
PO q8–12h

*H2-receptor antagonists have been shown to be inferior to
proton pump inhibitors in their ability to suppress gastric acid
production in dogs and cats.

K22463_C008.indd 272

Definition/overview
Helicobacter spp. are spiral-shaped gram-negative bacteria that can live in an acidic environment. While their
association with peptic ulcer and gastric neoplasia in
people has been clearly documented, their pathogenic
potential in dogs and cats is less well defined. H. pylori,
the most prevalent Helicobacter infecting people, does not
represent a significant problem in small animals. H. heilmanii is the predominant species isolated from cats, while
H. bizzozeronii and H. salomonis are the most common species in dogs. The bacteria colonize mucus in the gastric
glands and cause local inflammation.

Clinical presentation
The main clinical sign is chronic-intermittent vomiting.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on ruling out other causes of chronic
gastritis (see above), and confirming with gastroscopy,
which may show gross lesions (Figure 8.30). Gastric

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

mucosal biopsies are collected and evaluated ­cytologically
(Figure 8.31), histopathologically, and/or using the urease test (Figure 8.32).

273

8.31

Management
While the pathogenic potential of Helicobacter spp. in dogs
and cats is still subject to discussion, animals presented
with clinical signs of chronic gastritis, histologic evidence
of gastric inflammation, and concurrent presence of
­spiral-shaped bacteria in the gastric mucosa and gastritis
should be treated. Eradication requires treatment with
different drugs usually consisting of one or more antimicrobial(s), an acid-reducing drug, and bismuth in some
protocols for a duration of 14–21 days. Examples of eradication protocols are listed in Table 8.7.

Prognosis
Prognosis is good; however, many animals may reinfect
themselves in their home environment.

Figure 8.31 Cytology picture of a gastroscopic mucosal
brushing showing multiple spiral-shaped bacteria in a dog with
helicobacteriosis. (Courtesy R. Husnik)

8.30

8.32

Figure 8.30 Gastroscopic view showing the pyloric antrum
of a 12-year-old male neutered Domestic Shorthair cat with
a 15-month history of intermittent vomiting, hyporexia,
and weight loss. There are multiple erosions associated
with mucosal bleeding. Histopathology revealed mild
lymphoplasmacytic inflammation and numerous spiral-shaped
bacteria on the mucosa. The cat responded to treatment with
amoxicillin, clarithromycin, and metronidazole.

Figure 8.32 Urease test. A gastric biopsy sample was placed
in this vial at the time of gastroscopy. The liquid was initially
yellow and then turned red, indicating the presence of ureaseproducing Helicobacter. (Courtesy R. Husnik)

K22463_C008.indd 273

25/04/16 10:33 pm

274

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 8.7 Examples of oral treatment protocols for eradication of Helicobacter spp. in dogs and cats.
Antimicrobial

Antacid

Metronidazole (10–15 mg/kg q12h)
Amoxicillin (20 mg/kg q12h)

Famotidine
(0.5 mg/kg
q12h)

Metronidazole (10–15 mg/kg q12h)
Amoxicillin (20 mg/kg q12h)

Other

Comments
D: 2-week duration

Bismuth subsalicylate (0.22 ml/kg
q6–8h)

Amoxicillin (20 mg/kg q12h)
Clarithromycin (7.5mg/kg q12h)
Metronidazole (10 mg/kg q12h)

D, C: 3-week duration
C: 2-week duration

D, successful use reported in dogs; C, successful use reported in cats.

Table 8.8 Causes of gastrointestinal ulceration in dogs and cats.
Dogs

Cats

Drugs
NSAIDs: (1) accidental ingestion (acute toxicosis); (2) chronic administration
(to treat orthopedic conditions)
Steroids: (1) with intervertebral disk disease; (2) other

Drugs: NSAIDs; steroids

Neoplasia: gastric carcinoma, and other gastric tumors; mast cell tumor;
gastrinoma

Neoplasia: alimentary lymphoma, and others;
systemic mastocytosis; gastrinoma

Poor perfusion of gastric mucosa: hypoadrenocorticism, shock, inadequate
fluid therapy during anesthesia

Poor perfusion of gastric mucosa: shock,
inadequate perfusion during anesthesia

Other: Helicobacter spp. infection, inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatitis,
liver disease, uremic syndrome, prolonged intensive physical activity (sled
dogs), pyloric outflow obstruction, gastric dilatation–volvulus, gastric FB

Other: inflammatory bowel disease,
hypereosinophilic syndrome, Dieffenbachia
toxicosis, stress, gastric FB

GASTRIC ULCERATIONS AND EROSIONS
Definition/overview
Ulcers are mucosal lesions that extend to the muscularis
mucosae and the deeper layers (submucosa, muscularis),
and erosions are more superficial and limited to the lamina propria. While there are no reported numbers for the
prevalence of GI ulcers in small animals, they appear to
be uncommon in dogs and rare in cats.

Etiology
The main reported causes of gastric ulcer in dogs and
cats are listed in Table 8.8. Long-term treatment with
NSAIDs is probably the most common cause of canine
GI ulcers. Administration of NSAIDs using a higher dose
than that recommended by the manufacturer, or in combination with other NSAIDs or corticosteroids, significantly increases the risk of GI lesions. Dogs treated for

K22463_C008.indd 274

intervertebral disk disease are also at high risk of developing ulcerative lesions in the GI mucosa. Additionally,
GI ulceration may represent a complication of a variety
of diseases originating in or outside the GI tract. Gastric
tumors frequently ulcerate due to compromise in the
blood supply required to maintain the integrity of the
gastric mucosa. Finally, secretion of gastrin by gastrinomas and histamine by mast cell tumors may lead to excessive gastric acid production and disruption of the gastric
mucosal barrier, with resulting erosions and ulcerations.

Pathophysiology
The gastric mucosal barrier protects the gastric mucosa
from the acidic environment of the gastric lumen. The
hydrophobic mucous layer produced by the mucous neck
cells provides a physical barrier separating the gastric
epithelium from the gastric lumen and its content. It is
rich in bicarbonate, which acts as a buffer against acid.

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

Other factors involved in maintaining the mucosal barrier
include the high mucosal blood flow providing nutrients,
bicarbonate, and oxygen to the mucosa and eliminating
acid residues, the local production of prostaglandin E2,
and the rapid turnover of epithelial cells. Gastric ulcers
and erosions occur in the presence of drugs or disease processes that weaken or disrupt the gastric mucosal barrier.

Clinical presentation
In dogs, the typical presentation revolves around vomiting with or without hematemesis (Figure 8.33). Cranial
abdominal pain may be present. Signs resulting from fluid
and possibly blood loss (dehydration, shock, anemia) may
become apparent. While melena may be observed during
the rectal examination (Figure 8.34), it is only obvious in
8.33

275

case of significant blood loss (>2.5–3.5 ml/kg body weight).
In case of perforating ulcer, septic peritonitis usually develops with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS,
sepsis).
Cats with GI ulceration may also be presented with
vomiting, hematemesis, abdominal pain, and melena.
However, some cats may only show vomiting with nonspecific signs such as anorexia and lethargy. GI ulcers associated with neoplasia (e.g. gastric tumor, ­mastocytosis)
tend to have a more protracted course with weight loss
and other clinical signs caused by the underlying disease.

Differential diagnosis
Vomiting (see Chapter 2.4, Table 2.4.2). Severe gastric
inflammation, duodenal ulcers, and acute pancreatitis
may also cause hematemesis. Furthermore, mucosal bleeding associated with coagulopathies or platelet diseases
may also lead to hematemesis and melena. Abdominal
pain may be associated with acute pancreatitis, GI FBs,
and gastroenteritis.

Diagnosis

Figure 8.33 Bloody vomit with typical coffee ground
appearance from a dog with a gastric ulcer due to acute NSAID
toxicosis. (Courtesy R. Husnik)
8.34

Figure 8.34 Melenic feces recovered from the rectum of a dog
with gastric adenocarcinoma.

K22463_C008.indd 275

In animals with suggestive evidence of GI ulceration,
the diagnostic approach should focus on two objectives:
(1) confirm the presence of an ulcerative GI lesion, and
(2) search for an underlying disease predisposing the animal to develop GI ulcers.
A minimal database consisting of CBC, serum biochemistry, urinalysis, and abdominal imaging should
be obtained. The CBC may show evidence of blood loss
anemia (microcytic hypochromic anemia), which may be
regenerative or nonregenerative depending on the duration of blood loss, and/or changes associated with the
underlying disease. Serum biochemistry may reveal an
increased BUN in an otherwise fasted patient (suggestive
of GI bleeding) and/or abnormal results due to fluid and
electrolyte loss or to an underlying disease. Abdominal
radiographs are important to rule out a GI obstruction.
Additionally, they may identify signs of perforation and
peritonitis (e.g. peritoneal effusion with decreased serosal detail, pneumoperitoneum). Abdominal ultrasound
allows a more detailed assessment of the gastric pylorus,
antrum, and body, and is useful to confirm the presence
of free fluid or gas in the peritoneum. Moreover, a full
abdominal scan allows evaluation of the other abdominal organs in the search for underlying disease. Masses
detected during the physical examination (e.g. skin masses
[mast cell tumors]) or during the ultrasound examination
should be aspirated and evaluated cytologically.
The diagnostic examination of choice to confirm GI
ulceration is endoscopy. Ulcers may be disseminated

25/04/16 10:33 pm

276

Diseases of specific organ systems

throughout the gastric mucosa (long-term use of NSAIDs
in dogs) or present on the lesser curvature at the entrance
of the pyloric antrum (acute NSAID toxicosis, gastric
tumors) (Figures 8.35, 8.36). Mucosal biopsies should be
collected around the ulcer margins and in other areas
and evaluated histologically. In cases of gastric neoplasia,
an effort should be made to collect deep biopsies of the
tissue surrounding the ulcer(s).

Management/prevention
Supportive treatment is essential and includes c­ orrection
of fluid and electrolyte deficits and administration of
antiemetics as needed. If the animal is in pain, appropriate analgesia should be provided using opioid drugs.
A surgical approach is required after initial stabilization
of the patient in cases of perforated ulcers and associated
peritonitis.
Protection of the gastric mucosa with inhibitors of
acid secretion is essential. Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs;
e.g. omeprazole) are considered more effective than histamine type-2 inhibitors (H2-inhibitors; e.g. famotidine,
ranitidine) for providing continuous acid suppression
during their duration of action. Among H2-inhibitors,
famotidine is more reliably efficacious than ranitidine
and cimetidine. Inhibitors of acid secretion should be
administered over a prolonged period of time to dogs and

8.35

cats with GI ulcers (4–6 weeks). Additionally, sucralfate is
the drug of choice to coat ulcers and promote a quicker
re-epithelization and healing. It is usually administered
simultaneously with an H2-receptor blocker or PPI,
although there is still some debate about the value of
staggering oral administration of sucralfate and these
drugs. Misoprostol is an oral prostaglandin E analog that
has been used with success in dogs with NSAID toxicosis
(see dosage in Table 8.6). Additionally, treatment of identified underlying conditions should be initiated as early
as possible.
Dietary support for gastric ulcers should consist of
an easily digestible diet that is low in fiber and fat and
promotes rapid gastric emptying. Alternatively, in some
patients, the preferred diet may need to be selected on the
basis of identified underlying diseases (e.g. hydrolyzed
diet in IBD, ‘renal diet’ in chronic kidney disease).
Prevention of GI ulcers is recommended in patients at
risk. First, simultaneous administration of steroid and
NSAIDs or treatments involving combinations of NSAIDs
should be avoided at all costs. In animals with severe
joint pain that are unresponsive to single agent therapy,
opioids and/or tramadol should be considered as part of
the analgesic protocol. Dogs and cats with a significant
burden of mast cell tumors are likely to benefit most from
H2-blocker therapy. In high-risk patients such as dogs
with intervertebral disk disease treated with corticosteroids or NSAIDs, PPIs or H2-blockers are often administered in the hope of limiting the extent of gastric mucosal
lesions. Similarly, dogs receiving long-term NSAIDs due

8.36

Figure 8.35 Gastroscopic view from a young Dalmatian that
accidentally ingested a high dose of naproxen. A sharply
delineated peptic ulcer is visible on the lesser curvature.

K22463_C008.indd 276

Figure 8.36 Gastroscopic view from an older mixed-breed
dog showing an ulcerated gastric adenocarcinoma with a deep
ulcerated center and raised edges. (Courtesy R. Husnik)

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

to chronic osteoarthritis or other orthopedic problems
may benefit from preventive gastroprotective treatment,
particularly once they have experienced signs of erosive/
ulcerative gastritis. Misoprostol may be of benefit as well.
Other risk situations include dogs receiving high immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids to treat various
immune-mediated diseases, although there is no documented benefit of preventive use of inhibitors of gastric
acid production in these patients.

Prognosis
In the absence of perforation, canine GI ulcers are
­usually associated with a good outcome if their cause
can be identified and eliminated (e.g. acute NSAID toxicosis). However, in many instances the underlying disease
may significantly compromise the prognosis (e.g. gastric neoplasia, chronic liver failure, chronic kidney disease). Cats with GI ulcers secondary to gastric lymphoma,
gastrinoma, and mastocytosis appear to have a good
prognosis.
Dogs with perforated gastric or duodenal ulcers that
undergo surgery usually have a reasonable survival if
the underlying problem can be successfully addressed.
However, only 50% of dogs with nonmalignant perforated
ulcers survived in a recent study from the UK. In cats, surgically treated perforated GI ulcers appear to have a good
prognosis.

GASTRIC DILATATION AND VOLVULUS
Definition/overview
Gastric dilatation–volvulus (GDV) is a syndrome that
occurs in large to giant breed dogs and is characterized
by rotation of the stomach on its mesenteric axis followed
by gaseous gastric distension.

277

emptying is possible. The distended stomach c­ ompresses
the c­audal vena cava and the portal vein, resulting in
decreased venous return to the heart, decreased cardiac
output, and ultimately cardiovascular collapse.

Clinical presentation
Abdominal distension with tympany, abdominal pain,
retching or vomiting (often nonproductive), hypersalivation, and acute collapse are common presenting signs.
Hypovolemic and/or distributive shock may be noticeable
on presentation (tachycardia, weak pulses, pale mucous
membranes with abnormal capillary refill time).

Differential diagnosis
Gastric dilatation secondary to overeating, mesenteric
volvulus, splenic torsion, diaphragmatic tear with gastric
herniation.

Diagnosis
Typical history and physical examination are ­suggestive;
however, they do not allow differentiation between gastric dilatation and GDV. Gastric volvulus is confirmed
with right lateral abdominal radiographs (Figure 8.37).
However, aggressive shock treatment and attempts to
deflate the stomach are often necessary before obtaining
survey abdominal films.

Management
Aggressive treatment of cardiovascular collapse using
two large bore catheters placed in each cephalic vein is
life-saving and needs to be initiated immediately after
8.37

Etiology
The precise etiology of GDV is unknown. Identified
risk factors include a narrow and deep thoracic conformation, stress, and nutritional factors that ultimately
lead to rapid filling of the stomach with large quantities of food or water. For instance, once daily feeding,
rapid ingestion of a meal, exercising after a meal, and
eating from a raised platform all have the potential to
trigger GDV.

Pathophysiology
The pylorus moves ventrally from the right to the left
with a resulting rotation of 90–360 degrees, and positions
itself near the gastric cardia on the left side. Gas accumulates in the stomach since neither eructation nor aboral

K22463_C008.indd 277

Figure 8.37 Right lateral abdominal radiograph of a dog
with gastric dilatation–volvulus. The antrum (A) is visible in the
dorsocranial aspect of the abdomen while the fundus (F) and
body (B) are located more caudal. Compartmentalization of the
stomach is visible (arrows). (Courtesy L. Gaschen)

25/04/16 10:33 pm

278

Diseases of specific organ systems

presentation. (See Chapter 23: Fluid therapy, for proper
choice of fluids and required doses.) If surgery needs to
be delayed (e.g. because of fluid resuscitation), orogastric ­intubation is attempted in order to decompress the
stomach and lavage its content (Box 8.4). If attempts at
orogastric intubation are unsuccessful, percutaneous trocharization may be performed using a 3 inch 12–14G IV
catheter that is introduced into the stomach caudally to
the last rib in the left flank after the region is clipped and
aseptically prepared. This usually causes some peritoneal
contamination with gastric content. Ultimately, explorative celiotomy with repositioning of the stomach is followed by evaluation of gastric wall vitality (Figure 8.38).
Partial gastrectomy may be required if segments of the
stomach are devitalized; p
­ artial or total splenectomy may
be necessary in the presence of splenic necrosis, infarction, or torsion. Gastropexy (pyloric antrum to right
abdominal wall) is recommended to lower the likelihood
of recurrence. Cardiac dysrhythmias commonly occur
and need to be addressed if they significantly compromise cardiac output. Hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia
need to be diagnosed and treated as they may complicate
cardiac arrhythmias.

Prognosis
The overall mortality rate is currently between 10% and
27%. Negative prognostic factors include >6-hour duration of clinical signs, post-fluid therapy serum lactate

concentration >6.4 mmol/l or <4 mmol/l decrease between
pre- and post-fluid lactate, and devitalized gastric wall
with need for gastric resection.

GASTRIC OUTLET OBSTRUCTION
Causes of gastric outlet obstruction include gastric FBs,
antral pyloric hypertrophy, and gastric neoplasia as well
as gastric pythiosis.

GASTRIC FOREIGN BODY
Definition/overview
Young animals are more likely to play with foreign
objects, but ingestion of gastric FBs may occur in animals
of any age. While many dogs are indiscriminate eaters at
risk for any type of GI FB, cats are more likely to ingest
linear FBs.

Etiology
FBs may consist of bones, toys, socks, towels, or linear
material such as string or wool. Linear FBs may lodge at
the pylorus and cause intestinal perforation and peritonitis. Hair balls may be a problem, especially in long-haired
cats (Box 8.5).

Pathophysiology
Gastric outlet obstruction may cause hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis.

Box 8.4 Procedure for passage of an orogastric tube in a
dog with gastric dilatation–volvulus.
1. Material. Use largest diameter smooth surfaced flexible
orogastric tube possible (e.g. >9.5 mm outside diameter in large dogs). Water-soluble lubricating jelly. Canine
mouth speculum (e.g. roll of 2 inch adhesive tape).
2. Sedation. With exception of recumbent or severely
affected dogs, mild sedation is usually required. One
option is IV administration of butorphanol (0.2–0.4
mg/kg) with diazepam (0.2–0.5 mg/kg).
3. Preparation. Mark the distance from the canine tooth to
the last rib on the tube using piece of tape.
4. Introduction. Cover the end of the tube with lubricating
jelly and gently introduce the tube through the speculum, pharynx, and esophagus. When the level of the
tape marking is reached, the tube should be at the lower
esophageal sphincter. Gently rotating the tube may be
required to pass the sphincter. Passage through the lower
esophageal sphincter should not require force.
5. Limit. The procedure should be aborted if the stomach
cannot be intubated after a few attempts. Consider percutaneous gastric trocharization (see text).

K22463_C008.indd 278

8.38

Figure 8.38 Exploratory celiotomy of a dog with gastric
dilatation–volvulus after repositioning of the stomach.
A devitalized portion of the stomach (antrum) is shown in the
foreground and compared with the normally perfused body.
(Courtesy D. Ogden)

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

Box 8.5 The problem of feline hairballs.
While hairballs commonly occur, particularly in longhaired
cats, they do not usually cause significant health problems.
Typically, affected cats vomit occasionally while remaining
otherwise healthy (‘healthy vomiters’). The formation of
hairballs may be related to the unusual fasted digestive
motility pattern displayed in cats, which may make the
emptying of hair material into the duodenum more
difficult. This promotes gastric retention of swallowed hair,
and ultimately formation of a hairball.
In most cats, treatment involves administration of a
petroleum laxative or dietary supplementation with a
bulk laxative. Psyllium is sufficient to control the problem.
Longhaired cats may benefit from regular clipping. In
some cats, trichobezoars may form, cause chronic gastritis,
and/or obstruct the gastric outlet and therefore require
endoscopic or surgical extraction. Frequent vomiting of
hairballs may also be an early sign of chronic enteropathies
and should prompt clinicians to initiate further diagnostic
tests. This is particularly true in shorthaired cats, which are
usually not prone to having hairballs.

Clinical presentation
History of possible FB ingestion and acute onset vomiting
in an otherwise normal animal. Anorexia and lethargy
are commonly associated signs. Cranial abdominal discomfort or pain may be elicited on palpation. Dehydration
and electrolyte and acid–base abnormalities are frequent
complications.

Differential diagnosis
Dietary indiscretion and GI infections (e.g. parvovirus)
are the most important differential diagnoses in puppies. In adult dogs, acute gastritis due to dietary indiscretion and acute pancreatitis are the top two differentials.
However, any GI or systemic disease causing acute vomiting should be considered both in dogs and cats.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is confirmed with abdominal imaging. Survey
radiographs may show a dilated stomach full of food or
secretions for a prolonged period after meals. In some
cases, the foreign object may be visible (Figures ­8.39–8.41).
In case of doubt, contrast radiographs may help to visualize the obstruction more accurately. Alternatively,
ultrasound examination of the stomach may confirm the
presence of a foreign object.

279

initiated to replace deficits and stabilize the patient prior
to inducing anesthesia.

Prognosis
Prognosis is generally good once the foreign material
has been removed. It may be guarded to poor in severely
debilitated animals or in cases with gastric perforation
and peritonitis. Possible surgical complications include
dehiscence and peritonitis.

GASTRIC ANTRAL PYLORIC HYPERTROPHY
Definition/overview
Thickening of the antral wall may be due to hypertrophy
of the mucosa, the muscularis, or both layers. Acquired
pyloric antral hypertrophy is most commonly due to
hyperplasia of the antral mucosa, and occurs preferentially in middle aged to older small breed dogs (e.g.
Lhasa Apso, Pekingese, Maltese, and Shih Tzu). Congenital
pyloric hypertrophy characterized by hyperplasia of the
antral muscularis is a rare congenital disorder of brachycephalic breeds such as Boxers, Boston Terriers, and
Bulldogs and has also been reported in Siamese cats.

Etiology/pathophysiology
The exact causes and pathophysiology remain unknown.
Recently, an increased frequency of GI tract lesions was
reported in brachycephalic dogs, and acquired pyloric
antral hypertrophy was diagnosed endoscopically in
>80% of examined dogs, although most of the dogs did
not show any clinical signs. An association was suggested
between the chronic inspiratory dyspnea seen in these
breeds and chronic duodenogastric reflux, which may be
the cause of the antral mucosal hypertrophy.

Clinical presentation
Chronic-intermittent vomiting that worsens progressively with severity of the mucosal hypertrophy and
resulting pyloric obstruction. In puppies and kittens with
the congenital form, signs start after weaning. Projectile
vomiting may occur.

Differential diagnosis
Other diseases of the stomach, chronic pancreatitis, diseases originating outside the GI tract (e.g. chronic kidney
disease).

Management

Diagnosis

Gastric FBs need to be removed either endoscopically
(Figures 8.41, 8.42) or surgically. Foreign material that
has partially passed into the duodenum (e.g. socks, towels)
should be removed surgically. Fluid therapy is promptly

Survey abdominal radiographs or abdominal ultrasound
may suggest delayed gastric emptying and show thickening of the antral wall. Barium contrast studies may be
useful to visualize the narrowing of the pyloric passage.

K22463_C008.indd 279

25/04/16 10:33 pm

280

Diseases of specific organ systems

8.39

8.40

8.41

Figures 8.39–8.41 Eight-year-old male neutered Pekingese
presented with a 10-day history of anorexia, vomiting, and
lethargy. (8.39) Ventrodorsal abdominal radiograph. A round
structure of soft tissue density is visible surrounded by gas
in the pyloric antrum. (8.40) The foreign body is not visible in
this dorsoventral view where gastric gas has accumulated in
the fundus. This highlights the importance of obtaining both
ventrodorsal and dorsoventral views for an optimal evaluation
of the stomach. (Radiographs courtesy LSU SVM Diagnostic
Imaging Service) (8.41) Gastroscopic view. A bouncing ball with
a smiley face is visible in the pyloric antrum and could easily be
extracted using an endoscopic snare.

Management
Diagnosis is confirmed with gastroscopy or surgical exploration, and histologic evaluation of mucosal or full-thickness biopsies. Antral mucosal folds can easily be viewed
on endoscopic evaluation of the stomach (Figures 8.43,
8.44). Histopathologic examination of mucosal biopsies
confirms the mucosal hyperplasia.

K22463_C008.indd 280

Treatment is surgical and consists of removing the redundant tissue and performing a Y-U pyloroplasty. Tissue
specimens should be submitted for histologic confirmation. In some instances, pyloric antral resection may be
required. Pyloric myotomy, while easier to perform, is
usually not successful in these animals.

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

281

8.42

Figure 8.42 Gastroscopic view of a dog that had chewed and
swallowed parts of a plastic soccer ball. Typical clinical signs
had been present for 3 weeks.

8.44

Figure 8.44 Gastroscopic view of the pylorus in a Boxer dog
with gastric antral pyloric hypertrophy. Note the prominent
mucosal fold obstructing the pylorus. There are multiple
erosions (bleeding) surrounding the pylorus. (Courtesy P.
Lecoindre)

8.43

Prognosis
Surgery is curative and the prognosis is good. Possible
surgical complications include dehiscence or lack of
improvement due to inappropriate surgical technique.

NONOBSTRUCTIVE GASTRIC EMPTYING
DISORDERS
Definition/overview
Motility is often the ‘missing link’ in the complex equation of GI health in dogs and cats. The prevalence of GI
motility disorders in small animals cannot be precisely
documented because obtaining a definitive diagnosis is
often difficult, sometimes even impossible. However, it
is thought that these disorders are of significant clinical
importance.

Etiology
Figure 8.43 Gastroscopic view of the pylorus in a French
Bulldog with gastric antral pyloric hypertrophy. Note the
prominent mucosal folds surrounding the pylorus, with
multiple erosions (bleeding) that may be associated with
duodenogastric reflux. (Courtesy P. Lecoindre)

K22463_C008.indd 281

Elucidating the origin of nonobstructive GI dysmotility is
often challenging. Often, it results from diseases located
outside the GI tract, including abdominal inflammation
(e.g. acute pancreatitis), immune-mediated diseases, and
metabolic diseases. Alternatively, motility disorders may

25/04/16 10:33 pm

282

Diseases of specific organ systems

also result from primary GI disorders such as GI inflammation or neoplasia. Furthermore, diseases affecting the
autonomic nervous system, such as dysautonomia, also
impact GI motility. Finally, postoperative ileus has been
shown to cause a significant delay in gastric emptying of
up to 48 hours in dogs undergoing abdominal surgery.

Clinical presentation
Vomiting of more or less digested food is the most common clinical sign, particularly when it occurs long after
food intake (e.g. >10–12 hours), when the stomach should
be empty. Projectile vomiting may occur in the absence
of a prodromal phase. Additionally, the animal may be
bloated and have pain on cranial abdominal palpation
and/or signs of colic. Decreased appetite or anorexia,
signs of nausea, increased belching, pica, and/or polydipsia may also be observed.

Differential diagnosis
Due to the relatively vague symptomatology, the list of
differential diagnoses is long. It is essential to first rule
out GI obstruction, which may require immediate surgical management.

Diagnosis
Since many underlying disorders may affect gastric
motility, a minimal database (CBC, chemistry panel, urinalysis) plus survey abdominal radiographs are indicated to screen for underlying diseases and confirm the
absence of GI obstruction (Figure 8.45). Accurate assessment of gastric emptying is difficult under practical conditions. Radionuclide scintigraphy is recognized as the
current gold standard in dogs and cats but is only available at select referral centers. Radiographic studies are
8.45

easily accessible in clinical veterinary practice. However,
assessment of gastric emptying of liquid barium is an
insensitive technique, with the exception of diagnosis
of mechanical obstructions. Mixing barium with food
may allow better evaluation of the solid phase of gastric
emptying. Unfortunately, barium can easily dissociate
from the test meal and cause the study to be unreliable.
Barium-impregnated polyethylene spheres (BIPSTM) have
been used for evaluation of GI transit times in dogs and
cats. However, correlation between gastric emptying of
BIPS and the gold standard has been disappointing in
dogs and in cats, and the use of these spheres has been
limited. Abdominal ultrasound is a promising and widely
available modality for the evaluation of gastric antral
motility and gastric emptying.

Management
Proper diagnosis and treatment of any underlying disease
that may affect gastric motility are essential. Therapy
of functional, nonobstructive disorders of gastric motility is based on dietary modification and judicious use of
prokinetic drugs.
Dietary modifications designed to facilitate gastric
emptying are based on knowledge of digestive physiology. First, gastric emptying of liquid food is faster than
that of solid foods. Also, diets with high caloric density
tend to remain longer in the stomach. In addition, gastric
emptying of fat is slower than that of proteins, which is
slower than that of carbohydrates. Consequently, feeding
a liquid or semi-liquid diet of low caloric density low in fat
and protein should maximize gastric emptying. Finally,
increased meal frequency and decreasing meal size are
also useful. Dietary treatment of bilious vomiting or duodenogastric reflux consists of feeding a light meal late at
night. Additionally, prokinetic drugs may be beneficial in
nonobstructive disorders of gastric emptying (Table 8.9)

Prognosis
Prognosis is good if the primary cause of delayed gastric
emptying can be corrected. Idiopathic GI dysmotility can
be a challenge to manage efficiently. Dysautonomia carries a poor prognosis in cats and dogs.

GASTRIC NEOPLASIA
Definition/overview
Figure 8.45 Right lateral abdominal radiograph of a 15-yearold male neutered Cocker Spaniel with recurrent episodes of
bloat and colic. The stomach is dilated with gas, but there is
no indication of gastric outlet obstruction. Note: A radiopaque
cystic calculus is visible.

K22463_C008.indd 282

Stomach tumors are uncommon, and typically occur
in older in dogs and cats. Benign canine gastric neoplasms include adenomatous polyps and leiomyomas.
Adenocarcinoma and lymphoma are the most prevalent tumor types diagnosed in the dog, followed by

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

283

Table 8.9 Site of action and recommended dosage of gastrointestinal prokinetics.
Name

Site of action

Dose

Metoclopramide

Pyloric antrum, duodenum (?)

0.2–0.5 mg/kg PO, SC q8h
CRI: 1–2 mg/kg/24h

Cisapride

Lower esophagus (C), lower esophageal sphincter,
pyloric antrum, small intestine, colon

0.1–0.5 mg/kg PO q8–12h; dose can be progressively
increased up to 1 mg/kg q8h

Mosapride

Pyloric antrum

0.25–2 mg/kg PO q12–24h (D); currently only available
in Asia

Prucalopride

Pyloric antrum, small intestine (?), colon

0.01–0.6 mg/kg PO q12–24h; currently not available in
the USA

Erythromycin

Lower esophageal sphincter (D), pyloric antrum,
small intestine, colon

0.5–1.0 mg/kg PO or IV q8h (after dilution)

Ranitidine

Pyloric antrum (possibly small intestine, colon)

1–2 mg/kg PO q12h, or slowly IV (after dilution)

Nizatidine

Same as raniditine

2.5–5 mg/kg PO q24h

(D), dog only; (C), cat only; CRI, constant rate infusion.

leiomyosarcoma and stromal tumors. Lymphoma is the
most common gastric neoplasia found in cats.

Etiology
The etiology of gastric tumors has not been elucidated.
Canine breeds at risk for adenocarcinoma include the
Belgian Shepherd Dog, Rough Collie, and Staffordshire Bull
Terrier. A predisposition in male dogs has been reported
for gastric adenocarcinoma and gastric lymphoma.

Clinical presentation
The early stages of gastric neoplasia usually remain subclinical. Hyporexia is the most common clinical sign followed by vomiting and weight loss. In advanced stages
with ulceration of the gastric mucosa, hematemesis and
melena may occur. Vomiting is due either to gastric outflow obstruction or to abnormal gastric motility associated with the neoplastic wall infiltration. Adenomatous
polyps are usually subclinical unless they cause gastric
outflow obstruction.

Differential diagnosis
Other disease processes causing gastric outflow or small
intestinal obstruction (FBs, pythiosis). Other conditions
associated with dysorexia and vomiting that originate
from the GI tract or from other organ systems.

Diagnosis
A minimal database consisting of CBC, biochemistry panel
and urinalysis is recommended to evaluate the general
condition of the animal and screen for possible systemic

K22463_C008.indd 283

repercussions of gastric tumors such as blood loss anemia. Diagnosis is confirmed with abdominal imaging.
In some instances survey abdominal radiographs may
reveal an enlarged stomach with delayed emptying
(Figure 8.46). Filling defects or ulcerated areas may be
detected on contrast studies. Abdominal ultrasound often
shows thickening of the gastric wall (Figure 8.47). Most
canine gastric adenocarcinomas are located in the antral
area or on the lesser curvature, while lymphomas are
often diffusely infiltrative. Enlarged lymph nodes and/
or hepatic nodules suggestive of local metastases may be
visible (Figure 8.48). Double lateral thoracic radiographs
are useful to screen for pulmonary metastases. Cytologic
evaluation of ultrasound-guided aspirates of the abnormal gastric wall may be helpful to diagnose lymphoma
(Figure 8.49). Endoscopic evaluation with sampling
of mucosal biopsies in and around the suspect areas
(Figures 8.36, 8.50) and histologic evaluation are useful
to confirm the tumor type. While no appearance is typical for one specific tumor type, most adenocarcinomas
are ulcerated. Occasionally, tumors are located in the submucosal layers, and obtaining representative endoscopic
biopsies may be challenging.

Management/prognosis
By the time animals develop clinical signs and are presented to a veterinarian, the neoplastic process is often
advanced and severe. Probably due to a high prevalence of metastases at the time of diagnosis, surgical
resection (antral resection and gastroduodenostomy, or
Billroth type I procedure) does not significantly improve

25/04/16 10:33 pm

284

Diseases of specific organ systems

8.46

8.49

8.47

8.48

the prognosis of dogs with gastric adenocarcinomas.
However, surgery may be a successful option for canine
leiomyosarcomas, with a reported median survival time
of 12 months. While canine gastric lymphomas usually
carry a poor prognosis, feline alimentary lymphomas
may respond to specific chemotherapy protocols. Small
cell feline alimentary lymphomas usually achieve prolonged remission with prednisolone (1–2 mg/kg PO daily)
and chlorambucil (2 mg PO q48h) therapy. Large cell alimentary lymphomas require more aggressive chemotherapy protocols and their prognosis is less favorable.

K22463_C008.indd 284

Figures 8.46–49 Twelve-year-old Domestic Shorthair cat
with anorexia, weight loss, and lethargy of 4 weeks’ duration.
(8.46) Right lateral abdominal radiograph. The cat is severely
overweight. Although the cat did not eat for 2 days, the
stomach is distinctly visible and partially filled with gas
(arrows). The gastric wall appears thickened at the level of the
pyloric antrum (although this could also be due to summation
of gastric fluid and gastric wall), and the serosal contour of the
stomach is somewhat irregular. (Courtesy C. Montgomery) (8.47)
Abdominal ultrasound of the same cat. The gastric wall at the
level of the pyloric antrum is severely thickened (14.8 mm
between the two calipers). (8.48) Abdominal ultrasound of
the same cat. The gastric lymph nodes are very prominent
(distance “A”, 19.6 mm; distance “B”, 21.2 mm). (Ultrasound
images courtesy LSU SVM Diagnostic Imaging Service) (8.49)
Cytologic evaluation of a fine needle aspirate from the
gastric wall depicted in 8.47. A dense population of mediumsized lymphocytes and a few large lymphoblasts are visible,
confirming the diagnosis of gastric lymphoma (50× objective).
(Courtesy V. Le Donne)

Part 4: Diseases of the small intestine
Overview
Small intestinal diseases are common in dogs and
cats. The small intestine is the intestinal segment
where absorption of nutrients, electrolytes, and water
takes place. Small intestinal brush border enzymes are
­essential for activation of pancreatic enzymes and final
processing of nutrients before they can be absorbed
through the mucosa using active and passive diffusion
mechanisms.

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

285

8.50

8.51

Figure 8.50 Close-up endoscopic view of a gastric
adenocarcinoma in a 15-year-old female spayed Miniature
Schnauzer. There are thickened mucosal folds surrounding an
ulcerated area.

Small intestinal anatomy
The small intestine is divided into three anatomic segments: duodenum, jejunum, and ileum. The total surface
of the small intestinal mucosa is multiplied by a factor of
500 through formation of mucosal villi and presence of
microvilli on the luminal surface of the enterocytes. The
microscopic structure consists of mucosa, submucosa, and
both the internal and external muscular layers (Figure
8.51). The mucosa consists of villi, lamina propria, and
muscularis mucosae (Figure 8.52). The epithelial cells
multiply in the small intestinal crypts and migrate over a
few days to the tips of the small intestinal villi while they
are undergoing maturation.

Figure 8.51 Photomicrograph of the jejunal wall in a cat at low
power. M, mucosa; S, submucosa; MI, muscularis interna (circular
muscle layer); ME, muscularis externa (longitudinal muscle
layer); arrow (muscularis mucosae). H&E stain.

8.52

Normal small intestinal function
Digestion and absorption
In the small intestine, pancreatic and gastric enzymes
facilitate luminal digestion, while enzymes produced by
epithelial cells and located in the brush border of enterocytes are responsible for triggering the activation of
pancreatic enzymes and further processing of oligo- and
disaccharides, small peptides, and lipids. Carbohydrates,
amino acids, and fatty acids are transported actively or
passively through the epithelial barrier using transcellular and paracellular pathways. Lipids undergo complex transformations in order to be absorbed into the

K22463_C008.indd 285

Figure 8.52 Photomicrograph of the jejunal mucosal layer in a
cat. 1, jejunal crypt; 2, tip of jejunal villus; 3, lamina propria; 4,
muscularis mucosae (arrow). H&E stain, 40× objective.

25/04/16 10:33 pm

286

Diseases of specific organ systems

epithelial cells. Chylomicrons are formed in the enterocytes and diffuse into the lacteals to the thoracic duct.
The intestinal barrier prevents free passage of intestinal
content into the body and consists of the enterocytes with
the glycocalyx that bathes their microvilli and the tight
junctions that connect them on their lateral membrane.

8.53

Small intestinal motility
Three physiologic motility patterns are described in the
small intestine: peristaltic waves (aboral movement of
chyme over long intestinal segments), stationary contractions (leading to intestinal segmentation), and clusters of
contraction (mixing and aboral movement of chyme over
short segments). Diarrhea usually is associated with the
occurrence of pathologic giant aboral contractions.

ACUTE ENTERITIS

8.54

Overview
Acute enteritis occurs frequently in dogs and cats and can
be a sign of many diseases affecting the small intestine
primarily or secondarily. The approach to diarrhea is
explained in Chapter 2.6 (Table 2.6.1 lists the characteristics of small bowel diarrhea; Table 2.6.2 lists the various
causes of acute diarrhea). This chapter provides further
details on common causes of acute enteritis. Overall, viral
and parasitic causes of enteritis are more commonly
diagnosed in puppies and kittens, while bacterial enteritis and dietary indiscretion can occur at all ages; finally,
acute hemorrhagic diarrhea syndrome (AHDS) affects
middle aged to older dogs.

VIRAL ENTERITIS
canine parvoviral enteritis
Overview
The etiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, and prevention
of canine parvovirus infection are also discussed in
Chapter 21 (Infectious diseases). The virus targets rapidly dividing cells such as small intestinal crypt cells
(Figures 8.53, 8.54). It eventually greatly diminishes the
absorptive capacity of the small intestine and compromises the intestinal barrier. The risk of bacterial translocation, bacteremia, and sepsis is greatly enhanced by the
concurrent neutropenia.

Clinical presentation
The following breeds are at higher risk of infection:
Rottweiler, Dobermann, Labrador Retriever, American
Staffordshire Terrier, German Shepherd Dog, and Alaskan
Malamute. The most severe cases occur in puppies

K22463_C008.indd 286

Figures 8.53, 8.54 Six-month old dog with parvovirus
infection. (8.53) Photomicrograph of the jejunal mucosa.
There is severe villous atrophy with necrotic crypts (see 8.54).
H&E stain, 40x objective. (8.54) Photomicrograph of the jejunal
crypts. Several crypts lack epithelial lining (black arrows) and
are filled with necrotic material, while others show evidence of
epithelial regeneration (white arrows). (Courtesy N. Wakamatsu)

between the ages of 4 and 12 weeks, at the time when
maternal immunity fades away. However, parvovirus
infection is prevalent in dogs until 6 months of age.
Anorexia and vomiting are often the first clinical signs
observed. They are followed a few hours later by foul
smelling, often bloody diarrhea (see Figure 2.6.7). Without
treatment, puppies rapidly dehydrate. Fever is generally
­associated with secondary bacterial infection.
Intense vomiting and diarrhea may cause metabolic acidosis that often responds well to IV fluid therapy with crystalloids and colloids, and generally does
not require administration of sodium bicarbonate.
Hypokalemia results from GI loss and may contribute
to the occurrence of intussusception. In severe cases,

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

287

severe complications, including sepsis and disseminated
­intravascular ­coagulation, may occur.

Box 8.6 Practical tip: outpatient treatment of canine
parvovirus infection.

Differential diagnosis

An outpatient treatment for dogs with parvoviral enteritis
was evaluated in a recent study. After initial in-hospital
stabilization with IV fluids, the outpatient treatment
consisted of:

In puppies or in young dogs presented for acute vomiting,
the differential diagnosis must include GI FB and intestinal intussusception, which should be ruled out with
abdominal radiographs. “Garbage can gut” and severe
infestation with intestinal parasites may also cause hemorrhagic gastroenteritis.

Diagnosis
A preliminary diagnosis of parvovirus infection is made
in the presence of acute hemorrhagic gastroenteritis in a
young dog that is not adequately vaccinated. The probable presence of a highly contagious disease justifies
drastic measures in order to prevent the spread of the
infection in the veterinary hospital (isolation of the sick
dog, thorough disinfection). Confirmation of diagnosis
requires fecal testing for parvoviral antigen using a cageside test. The antigen test may be positive during the
viral shedding period, which lasts for 10–12 days after
infection. However, the result may be false negative as
viral shedding may wax and wane. Also, the test can give
a false-positive result in dogs that have been recently
vaccinated with a modified live vaccine. In such cases,
fecal PCR may be useful to differentiate vaccine and wild
type virus. Neutropenia is a typical finding in dogs with
parvovirus infection; however, it is not always present at
the time of the initial veterinary visit. Detection of other
laboratory changes may be useful to set up an adequate
treatment plan. Electrolyte abnormalities, especially
hypokalemia, should be corrected. Panhypoproteinemia
(characterized by simultaneous presence of hypoalbuminemia and hypoglobulinemia) is due to intestinal
protein loss. Depending on the severity of the problem,
natural or synthetic colloids should be used to support
oncotic pressure.

Management
Aggressive treatment is required and consists of rapid
correction of fluid deficits and electrolyte imbalances.
Crystalloids and colloids are used in adequate amounts
with added electrolyte solutions as needed. However, a
recent scientific abstract has suggested good success in
treating dogs with parvovirus infection on an outpatient
basis (Box 8.6).
It is essential to stop the vomiting as quickly as
possible. A variety of antiemetic agents are available
(see Chapter 2.4, Table 2.4.1). A combination of these antiemetic drugs with different modes of action is sometimes
required to obtain the desired result. Recent research

K22463_C008.indd 287

•• SC administration of isotonic fluids (40 ml/kg q8h after
replacement of fluid deficits)
•• Enteral nutrition
•• Daily SC injections of maropitant (1 mg/kg)
•• One SC injection of cefovecin (8 mg/kg), a proprietary
long-acting 3rd generation cephalosporin.
The 80% survival rate compared favorably with the 90%
recovery rate in hospitalized parvovirus patients treated
with IV fluids. Also, there was no difference in time to
recovery between the hospitalized and the outpatient
group. The results of this study appear to document the
validity of an alternative option for owners who cannot
afford the costly hospitalization for puppies and young
dogs infected with parvovirus.
Source: Preisner K, Sullivan L, Boscan P et al. (2013)
Evaluation of an outpatient protocol in the treatment of
canine parvoviral gastroenteritis. J Vet Intern Med 27(3):721
(Abstract)

has shown the benefits of early feeding in very small
amounts; dogs that received early nutrition after they
stopped vomiting had a lower mortality and a faster
weight gain during recovery.
Because of the risk of secondary bacterial infection,
parenteral administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics
such as amoxicillin and clavulanic acid (12.5–20 mg/kg
IV q12h) is recommended. Parenteral aminoglycosides
(with risk of nephrotoxicity) or fluoroquinolones (e.g.
enrofloxacin, 10 mg/kg q24h, off-label in growing dogs)
may be added to improve efficacy against gram-negative
bacteria.
Disinfection of contaminated surfaces is essential
in order to prevent spread of infection. Disinfectants
with demonstrated efficacy against parvovirus include
sodium hypochlorite, aldehydes, and oxidizing agents. A
1:30 dilution of commercially available bleach is efficacious after 10 contact minutes. However, bleach is a mucosal irritant and may damage metals, rubber, plastic, and
cement. It is inactivated by light, thus it is preferable to
prepare solutions immediately before their use. It is also
inactivated in the presence of organic material such as
mud or feces. Oxidizing solutions such as hydrogen peroxide (Virox®, Accel®) and potassium peroxide monusolfate (Virkon®, Trifectant®) claim extremely high efficacy
within minutes with minimal corrosive effect.

25/04/16 10:33 pm

288

Diseases of specific organ systems

8.55

Prognosis
Dogs with mild to moderate disease generally have a
good prognosis if appropriate treatment is initiated early.
In severe cases the prognosis is fair because complications are more common and therapy is more intensive.
Overall, quick diagnosis and early and aggressive treatment ­optimize therapeutic success.

Other viral intestinal infections
Feline panleukopenia and canine and feline coronavirus
infections are discussed in detail in Chapter 21 (Infectious
diseases).

BACTERIAL ENTERITIS
Overview
The term intestinal microbiota describes all microorganisms naturally present in the intestinal lumen. The small
intestinal microbiota has important functions in the preservation of anatomic structures and for the proper occurrence of physiologic processes necessary for digestion of
food and absorption of nutrients. It also plays an important role in the prevention of colonization of the mucosa
by pathogenic bacteria, and exerts a positive influence on
the development of the enteric immune system.
Rarely, dogs and cats may develop bacterial enteritis.
Responsible pathogenic agents include Campylobacter,
Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium difficile, and
Salmonella spp., as well as specific strains of Escherichia
coli. However, these same bacteria can also be isolated in
the feces of healthy dogs and cats. While the exact role of
bacterial enteropathogens in dogs and cats with enteritis
remains controversial, they may present a risk of zoonotic infection for people after contact with shedding
dogs and cats. These facts have contributed to an unclear
situation that renders diagnostic and therapeutic decisions difficult. If these bacteria are not the source of the
animal’s problems, use of antibiotics is not recommended
because it may lead to development of resistant strains,
which in the long term may have repercussions on public
health. Additional research is necessary to more clearly
define the role of enteropathogens in canine and feline
intestinal diseases.

Figure 8.55 Campylobacter jejuni. Scanning electron
microscope view. (Source: USA Department of Agriculture)

C. upsaliensis, C. jejuni, C. helveticus, and C. coli may be present in the feces of healthy and diarrheic cats and dogs.

Pathophysiology

Campylobacteriosis

Campylobacter attach to enterocytes, invade them, and
produce enterotoxin-like substances. However, the true
role of Campylobacter as a cause of diarrhea in dogs and
cats is difficult to assess, since both healthy and diarrheic animals may shed these bacteria in their feces. In
people, Campylobacter may cause abdominal discomfort,
fever, and (possibly bloody) diarrhea. The disease is often
self-limiting, but may require antibiotic treatment. Risk
factors for infection in people include consumption of
poultry cooked at home, drinking water from a well, a
lake or a river, and daily contact with a dog. Consequently,
fecal excretion of Campylobacter in healthy pets appears
to represent a possible source of infection.

Etiology

Clinical presentation

Campylobacter spp. are slender, curved gram-negative
bacilli with polar flagellae that generally have a spiral shape (Figure 8.55). According to numerous studies,

Campylobacter may colonize both the small intestine (jejunum, ileum) and colon and cause enterocolitis. Therefore,
clinical signs may include small and/or large intestinal

K22463_C008.indd 288

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

diarrhea of varying severity in puppies and kittens as
well as adult animals. The disease is usually self-limiting
(1–2 weeks).

Differential diagnosis
Other causes of acute enteritis and/or colitis such as parvovirus infection (in puppies), parasite infestation with
hookworms, whipworms, Giardia, Cryptosporidium, or
Tritrichomonas (cats), other bacterial infections, dietary
indiscretion, AHDS (see below).

Diagnosis
Clinical signs of acute enterocolitis (with possible complications such as dehydration) and positive fecal culture or
PCR test are suggestive. However, Campylobacter may also
colonize the intestine as opportunists and be retrieved in
feces from healthy and sick dogs and cats. Documentation
of spiral-shaped bacteria on fecal cytology is not a useful
tool to confirm the diagnosis because it does not allow differentiation between Campylobacter and other nonpathogenic, spiral-shaped gram-negative bacteria.

Management

289

Box 8.7 Practical tip: use of probiotics in acute enteritis.
Probiotics are living microorganisms that may modulate
intestinal immune function, promote epithelial cell
homeostasis, exert neuromodulatory effects, block the
effects of pathogenic bacteria, and have nutritional
benefits.
Probiotics designed for use in dogs and cats and
manufactured by reputable pharmaceutical or pet food
companies are preferred, as over the counter products have
been shown not to be as reliable. Some products contain
one bacterial strain while others have several strains.
They have been shown to shorten the duration of acute
diarrhea in shelter cats and to decrease the time to first
normal feces in dogs with acute enteritis. In a recent
open study of dogs with IBD, a multi-strain highly
concentrated probiotic administered for 60 days appeared
to be as efficient as a combination of prednisone and
metronidazole.
Probiotics should be administered for 2–4 weeks to
animals with acute enteritis and probably for months in
dogs and cats with chronic enteritis. It may be preferable
to delay the initiation of probiotic treatment in dogs with
bloody diarrhea and compromised intestinal mucosal
barrier until the hemorrhagic diarrhea has resolved.

In animals with diarrhea, vomiting, and/or other clinical signs of enterocolitis, appropriate antibiotic treatment is often recommended even if the cause-to-effect
relationship between fecal presence of Campylobacter
and clinical disease is difficult to confirm. Antibiotics of
choice for treatment of campylobacteriosis in dogs and
cats include macrolides (e.g. erythromycin, 10–20 mg/kg
PO q12h; azithromycin, 5–10 mg/kg q24h for 10–14 days)
and fluoroquinolones (e.g. enrofloxacin, 5–10 mg/kg PO
q24h for 1 week). Repeat culture or fecal PCR is recommended after completion. Use of probiotics may be beneficial (Box 8.7). Owners should be advised about proper
hygiene.

enterotoxigenic. Enterotoxigenic C. perfringens causes
food-­
associated toxin infections in people. Clostridium
difficile produces two toxins (toxins A and B). In various
studies C. difficile was detected in feces from healthy puppies and their dam, from healthy adult cats and dogs, and
from cats and dogs with diarrhea presented to veterinary
clinics. In people, infections with toxigenic C. difficile are
a frequent cause of nosocomial enteric infections, and are
associated with antibiotic use and pseudomembranous
colitis.

Prognosis

Pathophysiology

Generally excellent. If an unrelated enteropathy is present, therapeutic success depends on identification and
treatment of the underlying disease.

High concentrations of pathogenic clostridial toxins in
the intestinal lumen may cause enteritis, but this hypothesis has not been confirmed.

Clostridial infection

Clinical presentation

Etiology
Clostridia are gram-positive anaerobic bacteria that
produce endospores. Clostridium perfringens is broadly
distributed in the environment. It has been cultivated
from 70% or more feces of healthy dogs and diarrheic
dogs. It produces enterotoxin, and only 5–14% of isolates
from healthy dogs and 15–34% from diarrheic dogs are

K22463_C008.indd 289

In dogs and cats, clostridial infections have been associated with nosocomial diarrhea, hemorrhagic enterocolitis, and acute or chronic small and/or large bowel
diarrhea. C. perfringens may also be implicated in the
pathogenesis of AHDS (see below).

Differential diagnosis
See Campylobacteriosis.

25/04/16 10:33 pm

290

Diseases of specific organ systems

Diagnosis
Confirmation of diagnosis is problematic in small animals. Fecal isolation or PCR amplification of C. perfringens
or C. difficile does not confirm that clostridia are indeed
responsible for the diarrhea. Similarly, a fecal endospore
count performed on fecal smears is not reliable. Fecal
enterotoxin and toxins A and B can be detected using
immunoenzymatic methods, and the presence of toxin
genes can be confirmed with PCR amplification. However,
the precise value of diagnostic tests for clostridial toxins in confirming the pathogenicity of C. perfringens or
C. d
­ ifficile still needs to be established.

implicated in outbreaks of human salmonellosis, isolated
foci have been associated with visits to a veterinary hospital. This is why excellent hygiene is recommended around
dogs and cats shedding Salmonella, particularly if sensitive subjects such as very young children, elderly people,
and immunocompromised patients may be exposed.

Clinical presentation
Fever, vomiting, small and/or large bowel diarrhea,
anorexia, weight loss, and lethargy. In case of bacterial
translocation, signs of sepsis and involvement of other
organs.

Management

Differential diagnosis

Clostridial enteritis and/or colitis are generally self-­
limiting and respond well to supportive treatment. The
necessity for antimicrobial therapy is subject to discussion. C. perfringens and C. difficile are considered to be
sensitive to ampicillin, metronidazole, and tylosin. Use of
probiotics may be beneficial (Box 8.7). In cases of hospital-­
associated diarrhea, the required disinfection measures
must be implemented, and a good infection prevention
­protocol should be enforced.

See Campylobacteriosis.

Diagnosis
Fecal isolation and serotyping of Salmonella, PCR. CBC
may show changes suggestive of systemic inflammation,
and biochemistry profile may indicate involvement of
other organs.

Management

Excellent if proper treatment can be given.

Treatment consists of administration of antimicrobial
drugs on the basis of documented sensitivity of the isolated strain.

Salmonellosis

Prognosis

Prognosis

Etiology
Salmonella are rod-shaped facultative anaerobic
gram-negative bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family. The majority of Salmonella relevant to veterinary
­medicine are serovar S. enterica subspecies enterica.

Pathophysiology
Salmonella are enteroinvasive bacteria that may induce
acute mucosal inflammation resulting in enterocolitis,
mucosal sloughing, and secretory diarrhea. While most
Salmonella infections remain localized to the GI tract, bacterial translocation and septicemia may occur and cause
severe systemic complications. Generally, healthy adult
carnivores are resistant to salmonellosis. The prevalence
of healthy carriers is highest in shelters.
In people, salmonellosis is characterized by diarrhea,
fever, and abdominal cramps, often mild to moderate in
severity and followed by spontaneous recovery. The most
common infection pathway is through ingestion of contaminated food, in particular chicken eggs and egg-based
products, but also pork and chicken meat or contaminated
vegetables. Even though dogs and cats are only rarely

K22463_C008.indd 290

Animals recovering from clinical salmonellosis may
become healthy Salmonella carriers for weeks after the
clinical signs have subsided. This may be due to persistence of Salmonella in the lymph nodes. Salmonella
may survive for long periods in the environment.

PARASITIC ENTERITIS
The Companion Animal Parasite Council (CAPC) maintains a very informative and freely accessible website
on intestinal parasitoses of small animals that should be
consulted for additional information (www.capcvet.org).

Hookworms
Etiology
Hookworms are common in tropical and subtropical
areas (Ancylostoma caninum – dog; A. tubaeforme – cat)
and warm coastal regions (A. braziliense – dog, cat), but
also in cooler climates (Uncinaria stenocephala – dog).
Adult hookworms live in the small intestine and produce eggs that are shed with the host’s feces, and develop
to 3rd stage larvae (L3), which are infectious. Dogs and

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

cats infect themselves by ingesting L3 (direct fecal–oral
transmission, ingestion of infected paratenic hosts such
as flies, cockroaches, and dung beetles), or through penetration of the skin by L3. In dogs, puppies can be infested
by nursing an affected bitch (transmammary infection).
Some larvae undergo arrested development in muscle and can be reactivated during stressful events and
migrate to the intestine.

Pathophysiology
Adult hookworms ingest the host’s blood and cause intestinal inflammation (Figure 8.56).

291

Management/prevention
Treatment with pyrantel pamoate (5–10 mg/kg PO,
repeat after 7–10 days) is approved for all hookworm
species. Fenbendazole (50 mg/kg PO q24h for 3 consecutive days) is also efficient. The efficacy of avermectins such as moxidectin, milbemycin oxime, and
ivermectin differs between species. Supportive treatment
as required: for example, anemic puppies and kittens
often require blood ­transfusion (whole blood or packed
red blood cells).
Detailed preventive treatment protocols can be found
on the CAPC website.

Clinical presentation
The clinical signs consist mainly of small bowel diarrhea. Blood loss anemia can be life threatening in puppies (Figure 8.57). Hyporexia, weight loss, poor hair coat,
and pica may also be observed. In dogs that were infected
percutaneously, pruriginous skin lesions may occur at
the points of entry, particularly in the interdigital spaces.

8.57

Differential diagnosis
Other causes of acute enteritis. Acute blood loss anemia
in puppies may also be caused by heavy flea infestation,
which may occur concurrently to hookworm infestation
in stray puppies and kittens from tropical and subtropical areas.

Diagnosis
Fecal flotation and visualization of the parasite ova
(Figure 8.58).

Figure 8.57 Pale oral mucous membranes in a 12-week-old
mixed-breed puppy with massive hookworm infestation.

8.56

Figure 8.56 Postmortem view of hookworms causing damage
to a dog’s small bowel mucosa.

K22463_C008.indd 291

8.58

Figure 8.58 Photomicrograph of an Ancylostoma caninum
ova. (Courtesy E. Greiner)

25/04/16 10:33 pm

292

Diseases of specific organ systems

Public health consideration
Cutaneous larva migrans can occur when hookworm larvae penetrate human skin and result in a prurignious but
self-limiting dermatitis.

and cats: infestation is less common, and less likely to
cause clinical signs.

Differential diagnosis
In puppies and kittens other causes of acute enteritis;
intestinal FBs if the roundworms cause bowel obstruction.

Prognosis
Good to excellent.

Diagnosis

Roundworms

Fecal flotation and visualization of the parasite ova
(Figure 8.60).

Etiology
Ascarids that may infest small animals include Toxascaris
leonina (dogs and cats), Toxocara canis (dog), and Toxocara
cati (cat). Additionally, Baylisascaris procyonis (the raccoon
roundworm) may also occasionally infest dogs in North
America. Adult roundworms live in the small intestine
(Figure 8.59) and produce eggs that are shed in the feces.
Larvae are released upon ingestion of embryonated eggs
and migrate to the liver and lungs. Pulmonary lesions
can induce clinical signs in puppies. Larvae then undergo
tracheal migration, and eventually infest the small intestine, or somatic migration, with formation of cysts in tissues with possible reactivation in stressful situations.

Pathophysiology

Management/prevention
Piperazine, pyrantel pamoate, fenbendazole, and selected
avermectins (e.g. milbemycin oxime, moxidectin) should
be given to eliminate roundworms. Supportive treatment
should be administered as required.
Detailed preventive treatment protocols can be found
on the CAPC website.

Public health consideration
In people, ingestion of embryonated eggs from Toxocara
spp. may lead to larva migrans and cause pulmonary and
hepatic disease, retinitis, and neurologic disease. Toxocara
larva migrans can have a devastating outcome in people.

Adult roundworms cause enteritis, particularly in puppies and kittens.

Prognosis

Clinical presentation

Isospora spp.

Puppies and kittens: vomiting, small intestinal diarrhea,
poor general health, and development of a potbelly are
common. Heavy infestation can result in small intestinal
obstruction or intussusception. It can also cause pulmonary signs such as coughing and tachypnea. Adult dogs

Excellent.

Etiology
Dog – Isospora canis, I. ohiensis, I. neorivolta, I. burrowsi.
Cat – I. felis, I rivolta. Sporulated oocysts are ingested

8.59

8.60

Figure 8.59 Endoscopic view of an adult roundworm in the
duodenum of a cat. (Courtesy R. Husnik)

K22463_C008.indd 292

Figure 8.60 Photomicrograph of a Toxacara canis egg.
(Courtesy E Greiner)

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

(directly or via paratenic hosts) and further develop in
the small intestinal enterocytes (entero-epithelial cycle).

Pathophysiology
Isospora spp. replicate in the small intestine and may
induce villus atrophy, lacteal dilation, and hyperplasia of
the lymphatic follicles in Peyer’s patches.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs generally only occur in puppies and kittens,
and may consist of vomiting, watery diarrhea, abdominal
pain, and dysorexia. Dehydration and death can occur in
severe cases.

Differential diagnosis
Other causes of acute enteritis in puppies and kittens.

Diagnosis
Isospora spp. oocysts are usually large and easy to detect
on microscopic examination of supernatant fluid after
fecal flotation.

Management
While the disease is generally self-limiting, treatment may be required in clinical situations. The poorly
absorbed sulfa drug sulfadimethoxine (50–60 mg/kg
PO q24h for 5–20 days) is the only approved anticoccidial drug for dogs and cats in the USA (and in the UK).
Other antiprotozoal drugs, such as ponazuril (20 mg/kg
PO q24h for 1–3 days), are frequently administered off-label to dogs and cats after adequate compounding. In
breeding facilities and shelters, proper cleaning of the
environment (prompt elimination of feces before oocysts
sporulate, steam cleaning of contaminated surfaces),
treatment of dams prior to parturition, and preventive
anticoccidial treatment of all puppies and kittens may be
required.

293

Etiology
Ingestion of unusual food such as food prepared for
human consumption, garbage that may contain food in
various stages of decomposition, or any other food not
usually part of the affected dog or cat’s diet.

Pathophysiology
Toxins from rotting food cause small intestinal mucosal
irritation and may cause osmotic and secretory diarrhea.
Unusual food, such as food prepared for human consumption cannot be properly digested and absorbed, and thus
can cause osmotic diarrhea.

Clinical presentation
Acute diarrhea (with or without vomiting) is the most
common presentation. Lethargy, hyporexia, dehydration
and electrolyte imbalances, and abdominal discomfort
are common accompanying signs.

Differential diagnosis
Other causes of acute gastroenteritis/enteritis such as
parasite infestation and viral or bacterial enteritis. In
vomiting animals, intestinal obstruction should be ruled
out with appropriate abdominal imaging (Figure 8.61).
In puppies with possible exposure and questionable
immune status, parvovirus infection should be ruled out
prior to hospitalization.

Diagnosis
History and presentation are often very suggestive.

8.61

Prognosis
Excellent.

DIETARY INDISCRETION
Definition/overview
Dietary indiscretion is probably the most common cause
of acute gastroenteritis in dogs. Overall, puppies and
young dogs are more commonly affected than older dogs.
Some canine breeds such as Retrievers are known to be
prone to dietary indiscretion. Cats are more discriminant
eaters, and dietary indiscretion is rarely diagnosed in
this species.

K22463_C008.indd 293

Figure 8.61 Right lateral abdominal radiograph from a adult
mixed-breed dog with dietary indiscretion and functional ileus.
Generalized distension of small intestinal loops is present.
(Courtesy L. Gaschen)

25/04/16 10:33 pm

294

Diseases of specific organ systems

8.62

Management
Supportive with administration of fluids (IV, SC, or PO
depending on the severity of clinical signs), and antiemetics in vomiting or nauseous animals. A 12–24-hour fast
is implemented (puppies will require parenteral glucose
solution during fasting in order to avoid hypoglycemia),
followed by offering small meals consisting of commercial or home-made, easily digestible diet for 3–5 days and
progressive return to a balanced diet after that. Probiotics
may be useful (Box 8.7). In dogs with severe diarrhea and
abdominal discomfort, loperamide (0.1–0.2 mg/kg PO q8h)
or diphenoxylate (0.1 mg/kg PO q8h) may be indicated for
24–72 hours, although this is only rarely necessary. Dogs
that live in multi-story high-rise buildings might also be
candidates for antidiarrheal drugs because of the difficult
logistics for bringing them outdoors for defecation.

Prognosis
Good to excellent in most cases. Recurrences are common
in dogs prone to eating offending foods.

ACUTE HEMORRHAGIC DIARRHEA SYNDROME
Definition/overview
AHDS is a new name proposed to describe the canine syndrome known for decades as hemorrhagic gastroenteritis (HGE). A recent study demonstrated that affected
dogs do not have any gastric inflammation. The syndrome can affect dogs of all breeds and all ages, although
middle aged dogs of small and toy breeds seem to be
predisposed.

Etiology
The etiology of AHDS/HGE is not known, although abundant Clostridium perfringens were shown to be present
in the duodenum of affected dogs. Other hypotheses
include dietary or microbial toxins and severe dietary
indiscretion.

Figure 8.62 Hemorrhagic diarrhea from a dog with acute
hemorrhagic diarrhea syndrome.

Differential diagnosis
Parvovirus infection, bacterial infections, salmon poisoning disease, severe parasite infestations, dietary indiscretion, intestinal volvulus or intussusception, acute
necrotizing pancreatitis, acute liver disease, hypoadrenocorticism, sepsis, immune-mediated thrombocytopenia,
and vitamin K antagonist rodenticide toxicosis.

Diagnosis

It is unclear if clostridial proliferation is a cause or a consequence of the disease. Clostridial toxins do not appear
to be significantly involved in the pathogenesis. In addition, acute enteritis has negative repercussions on species diversity of the intestinal microbiota, and may cause
acute dysbiosis.

Initially, affected dogs typically have a high PCV (often
above 65%) and a normal or low serum concentration of
total solids (or total proteins, albumin, or globulins). White
blood cell counts may be normal, high, or low depending
on the severity of disease. Mild thrombocytopenia is common. Other serum biochemistry changes may include prerenal azotemia, increased liver enzymes, hypoglycemia,
and electrolyte abnormalities. Metabolic acidosis is often
present. Abdominal radiographs usually show an enteritis pattern with fluid- and gas-filled small intestinal loops.

Clinical presentation

Management

Acute onset bloody diarrhea (Figure 8.62), possibly with
vomiting and anorexia. Affected dogs are usually very
dehydrated and in various stages of hypovolemic shock.
Lethargy and abdominal pain are also common.

Aggressive fluid therapy. IV boluses of isotonic crystalloid
solutions (10–20 ml/kg) should be given to treat hypovolemic shock. Addition of synthetic colloids such as hetastarch may be useful (5–10 ml/kg with 10 ml isotonic

Pathophysiology

K22463_C008.indd 294

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

80

8

60

6

40

4

20

2

0

0

20
40
60
Time after presentation (h)

80

8.63

Good when dogs are presented early in the course of the
disease. Most dogs can be discharged following 1–7 days
of fluid therapy (median 3 days in a recent study). Serious
complications may include disseminated intravascular
coagulation, sepsis, and aspiration pneumonia in vomiting animals. AHDS/HGE may be fatal if the emergent
needs of the patient are addressed too late.

INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
Etiology
Small intestinal obstruction most often results from FBs
such as peach pits, corn cobs, toys, and fish hooks in dogs
and linear foreign bodies in cats. Other differential diagnoses for intestinal obstruction include intussusception
and neoplasia. Intussusceptions (Figure 8.64) are seen
mostly in young animals, particularly in conjunction
with severe acute enteritis, such as parvovirus infection
or ascarid infestation, but can also be seen in cases of
chronic diarrhea, such as IBD, and intestinal neoplasia.
Intestinal volvulus (torsion) is a rare disorder in dogs that
involves intestinal rotation at the root of the mesentery,
with complete occlusion of the cranial mesenteric artery
(Figure 8.65). This results in bowel necrosis, release of toxins, and life-threatening hypovolemic and septic shock.
Most cases have been reported in adult, medium to large
breed male dogs.

Pathophysiology
Small intestinal obstruction generally causes an accumulation of intestinal content, fluid, or gas in the loops
located craniad to the site of obstruction. Intussusceptions
8.64

0

Figure 8.63 Evolution of PCV (red line) and total solids (blue
line) with treatment in a 6-year-old Miniature Schnauzer dog
with acute hemorrhagic diarrhea syndrome. The initial PCV was
70% (reference range 35–55). The total solids plummeted from
7.5 to 3.5 g/dl within 24 hours with aggressive fluid therapy
(reference range 5.8–7.5).

K22463_C008.indd 295

Prognosis

Total solids (g/dl)

PCV (%)

crystalloids, continued with CRI of 1 ml/kg/hour). Perfusion
and cardiovascular status should be reassessed every
15 minutes, and further boluses administered as required
until normal blood pressure is restored. Fluid deficits
should be replaced over a 6–12-hour period with crystalloid solutions, adding the maintenance requirements
and estimated ongoing losses due to continuing diarrhea.
Electrolytes deficits such as hypokalemia should also be
corrected. Other treatments include antiemetics and possibly gastric antacids if decreased perfusion of the gastric
mucosa is suspected (see Table 8.6). The PCV generally
normalizes in response to aggressive fluid therapy, and
the serum protein concentration usually drops to levels indicative of hypoproteinemia, with both low serum
albumin and globulin concentrations (Figure 8.63).
Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be administered
IV in severe cases with existing or impending sepsis.
This is particularly important when mucosal sloughing is present. However, in the absence of these problems, systemic use of antibiotics is not recommended.
A recent study showed that cases of mild to moderate
severity do not appear to benefit from antimicrobial
treatment when endpoints such as time to resolution
of diarrhea and length of hospital stay are compared
between dogs given amoxicillin and clavulanic acid and
those receiving placebo. Probiotics are recommended
after resolution of bloody diarrhea (Box 8.7)
Dogs with AHDS/HGE should be fasted for 12–24 hours
and then offered small quantities of easily digestible food
frequently (boiled chicken and rice, adequate commercial
prescription diets). Puppies should receive parenteral
glucose supplementation.

295

Figure 8.64 An ileocolic intussusception was diagnosed and
surgically removed from a 1-year-old male Beagle with chronic
diarrhea. Shown is the cecum that was prolapsed into the
ascending colon. (Courtesy A. Grooters and K. Saile)

25/04/16 10:33 pm

296

Diseases of specific organ systems

8.65

Box 8.8 Practical tip: antiemetics may mask the signs of
gastrointestinal foreign bodies.
Several effective antiemetics are currently available to
veterinarians:
•• Metoclopramide, which can be administered as a CRI to
dogs and cats receiving IV fluids (1–2 mg/kg q24h)
•• Ondansetron (0.5–1 mg/kg IV or SC q12h) and
­dolasetron (0.6–1 mg/kg SC or IV q12h)
•• Maropitant (1 mg/kg IV or SC q24h)

Figure 8.65 Intestinal volvulus in a dog. The small bowel
loops are dilated with a hemorrhagic, necrotic wall. (Courtesy
R. Husnik)

are thought to occur as a complication of abnormal intestinal motility associated with enteritis or with abnormal
intestinal masses.

Clinical presentation
Clinical findings are related to the site, severity, and cause
of the obstruction. Complete upper intestinal obstruction
results in severe vomiting associated with fluid loss and
dehydration and possible hypovolemic shock. Partial
obstructions often present with an insidious onset of
vomiting and intermittent chronic diarrhea.

Differential diagnosis
Dietary indiscretion or other causes of acute gastroenteritis and acute pancreatitis are the top differentials.

Diagnosis
The history is sometimes helpful for raising suspicion of
a FB. A thorough physical examination is important in all
cases, including inspection of the base of the tongue for
linear foreign bodies, especially in cats (see Chapter 2.4:
Vomiting, Figure 2.6.9). Abdominal palpation may reveal
discomfort or pain, and an FB or intussusception may be
identifiable. Abdominal radiographs are essential to document or rule out obstruction (Box 8.8). Signs of intestinal
obstruction are readily recognizable (­Figures 8.66–8.69).
In severe cases, signs of bowel perforation, such as
decreased serosal detail and free abdominal gas, may
be present as well. Additionally, abdominal ultrasound
may help confirm the diagnosis of intussusceptions and
masses. A minimum database consisting of CBC, biochemistry panel, and urinalysis may help characterize the

K22463_C008.indd 296

These antiemetics may suppress vomiting in patients with
gastric or small intestinal foreign bodies, and thus delay
proper treatment involving foreign body retrieval via
exploratory celiotomy or endoscopy (for gastric foreign
bodies only). Delayed treatment may make it necessary to
resect intestinal tissue (when enterotomy would have been
sufficient with early intervention) or even increase the
risk of perforation. Consequently, abdominal radiographs
should be performed as soon as possible in dogs and cats
with history and clinical signs compatible with a GI foreign
body in order to rule out obstruction.

fluid and electrolyte losses and document inflammation
or sepsis in complicated cases.

Management
Treatment of intestinal obstruction involves surgical
removal of the cause of the obstruction (Figure 8.70).
Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be given IV to patients
with signs of intestinal perforation (e.g. amoxicillin,
20 mg/kg q8h; enrofloxacin, 10 mg/kg q24h; and metronidazole, 10–15 mg/kg q12h).

Prognosis
In the absence of complications such as intestinal perforation, the prognosis after surgical extraction of a FB is
excellent. The risk of suture dehiscence at the enterotomy
or enterectomy site is higher in the presence of peritonitis (i.e. perforation). There is a risk of recurrence for intussusceptions unless the underlying disease is controlled.
For intestinal volvulus, the prognosis is usually grave.

CHRONIC ENTERITIS
PARASITIC ENTERITIS
canine schistosomiasis
Etiology
Heterobilharzia americana is the agent of canine schistosomiasis, an uncommon disease endemic in the Southeast of
the USA and areas bordering the Gulf of Mexico. Raccoons

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

8.66

297

8.68

8.69

8.67

8.70

Figures 8.66, 8.67 Cat with a linear foreign body. (8.66)
Right lateral abdominal radiograph. All small intestinal loops
are located centrally, diffusely plicated, and corrugated in
appearance. There are multiple rounded, comma-shaped and
paisley-shaped gas opacities of varying size throughout the
small bowel. (8.67) Ventrodorsal radiograph of the same cat.
The arrow points to a caudally displaced small bowel loop
that displays a plicated appearance with content of mixed
soft tissue and gas density. (Courtesy L. Gaschen)

K22463_C008.indd 297

Figures 8.68–8.70 A 2-year-old female Jack Russell Terrier
presented with a 4-day history of vomiting. (8.68) Right
abdominal radiograph. The serosal detail is decreased throughout
the abdomen. The stomach, small intestines, and colon contain
a large amount of material with heterogeneous soft tissue and
gas density. (8.69) Ventrodorsal radiograph of the same dog.
(Courtesy LSU SVM Diagnostic Imaging Service) (8.70) Grass is
extracted through a mid-jejunal enterotomy. Large amounts of
grass were present throughout the gastrointestinal tract and were
impacting the small intestine. (Courtesy A. Grooters and K. Saile)

25/04/16 10:33 pm

298

Diseases of specific organ systems

are the parasite’s reservoir host. Freshwater snails are
obligatory intermediate hosts.

Pathophysiology
Percutaneous infection occurs through free-swimming
cercariae. After migration, adult Heterobilharzia produce
ova in the terminal branches of the mesenteric veins. The
ova are shed through the intestinal mucosa in the feces.
Granulomatous inflammation can be found in the intestinal submucosa (Figure 8.71) and in other organs as well.

Clinical presentation
Acute to chronic mixed small and large bowel diarrhea.
Dysorexia/anorexia, weight loss, often cachexia, lethargy,
melena, and/or hematochezia are common.

Etiology
Giardia duodenalis is a flagellated protozoan that exists
in two forms: a motile trophozoite of piriform to ellipsoidal shape (Figure 8.72) and a cyst form that is highly
resistant in the environment. Cysts are absorbed with
contaminated food or water, and release trophozoites
into the small intestinal lumen. Trophozoites multiply
by cell division and become encysted. Giardia cysts have
four nuclei and a thin envelope. Under favorable conditions they can persist for 3 weeks or even longer in the
environment.
8.71

Differential diagnosis
Includes IBD (including protein-losing enteropathy
[PLE]), severe parasitic enteritis, intestinal neoplasia.

Diagnosis
Blood work may reveal anemia, hypoalbuminemia,
hyperglobulinemia, and eosinophilia. Hypercalcemia
is present in >50% of affected dogs and may cause
polyuria/polydipsia. Radiographs may show mineralization of the small intestinal wall. Diagnosis is confirmed
with saline sedimentation of feces or a commercially
available fecal PCR.

Management
Praziquantel (25 mg/kg q8h for 2–3 days), possibly in
combination with fenbendazole (50 mg/kg q24h).

Figure 8.71 Photomicrograph of a duodenal mucosal
sample from a dog with canine schistosomiasis. There are
numerous eggs present in the mucosa that are associated with
granulomatous inflammation. (Courtesy M. Im Hof)
8.72

Prognosis
Depends on the severity of lesions at presentation. In a
recent retrospective study, the survival rate was 55%
after 6–36 months.

Giardiasis
Definition/overview
Studies concerning the prevalence of giardiasis in the
canine and feline populations report rates of 5–10% in
healthy pets and pets presented for veterinary care.
The prevalence is greatest in patients that live in high-­
density group housing, especially when recommended
disinfecting protocols are not carried out optimally.
In such cases, Giardia cysts can easily survive in the environment and continuously infect new animals or reinfect
animals after they have been treated.

K22463_C008.indd 298

Figure 8.72 Photomicrograph of a fecal smear from a dog with
Giardia infection. Two trophozoites are visible in the middle of
the picture. Wright–Giemsa stain. (Courtesy R. Husnik)

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

Giardia isolates are further divided into several different genotypes or assemblages with specific host
ranges. The zoonotic potential of canine and feline giardiasis is very low. Consumption of water contaminated
with Giardia cysts is the main origin of infections in
people.

Pathophysiology
Trophozoites are found in highest concentration in the
duodenum. They attach to the mucosal epithelium and
cause disease by affecting epithelial permeability.

Clinical presentation
Diarrhea with watery feces and admixed mucus. In severe
and chronic infections, malabsorption and weight loss
may occur and the animal may be in poor general condition. Importantly, many infected dogs and cats do not
show clinical signs.

Differential diagnosis
Other causes of chronic-intermittent diarrhea and malabsorption, such as other parasite infections, chronic
enteropathies (see below), exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, and possibly alimentary lymphoma (cats).

Diagnosis

Table 8.10 Diagnostic tests for Giardia in the feces of
dogs and cats.

Target

Sensitivity

Flotation with
zinc sulfate
or sugar
centrifugation

Cysts

Intermediate, operatordependent. Can be increased
from 70% to 90% if three
samples collected at 2–3 day
intervals are examined

IFA or ELISA

Specific
antigens

Intermediate to good.
Diagnostic accuracy of cageside ELISA test is equivalent
to that of antigen tests run
in the laboratory

PCR

DNA
sequences

Intermediate to high.
Only recommended for
determination of specific
assemblage

K22463_C008.indd 299

Management
The goal of treatment is to stop diarrhea and attempts
to fully eliminate Giardia infection may not be successful. In dogs, metronidazole (25–30 mg/kg PO q12h
for 5–8 days) and fenbendazole (50 mg/kg PO q24h for
3–5 days) are most commonly used. In cats, metronidazole
benzoate (25 mg/kg PO q12h for 7 days) is well tolerated
and eliminates cyst shedding within 7–10 days of treatment. Fenbendazole can also be used at the same dose as
in dogs, although its efficacy may be inferior. Other drugs,
including tinidazole (44 mg/kg PO q24h for 3 days), can
also be used in cats.
An increased rate of resistance of Giardia spp. to metronidazole and other antigiardial agents has been reported
in human patients. However, no published data concerning drug resistance of canine or feline giardiasis are currently available.
Dogs kept in group housing should be removed from
their runs, shampooed, and rinsed with quaternary ammonium based disinfectants. The runs should be cleaned and
disinfected before reuse. Quaternary ammonium containing disinfectants have shown an excellent efficacy for
inactivating Giardia cysts in a short period of time.

Prognosis
Good

Several diagnostic tests are available for the diagnosis
of Giardia infections in dogs and cats (Table 8.10 and
Figure 8.72). Confirmation of diagnosis can be complicated by the fact that cysts are shed intermittently.

Diagnostic
test

299

Cryptosporidiosis
Etiology
Cryptosporidium canis (dog) and C. felis (cat). The cycle of
the parasite is complex and consists of asexual and sexual
stages. Sporulated oocysts protected by a wall that is resistant to many environmental factors are passed with the
feces and are infectious to appropriate hosts. Prevalence
rates between 0% and 38.5% have been reported in different feline populations, while prevalence rates reported in
dogs were 0–44.8%. The mode of transmission is via the
oral–fecal route.

Pathophysiology
Cryptosporidium spp. are obligate intracellular parasites
that infect enterocytes in the small intestine. They damage the epithelial microvilli and enterocytes, and may
cause villous atrophy and inflammatory infiltration of
the lamina propria.

Clinical presentation
Cryptosporidium infection may be associated with diarrhea, particularly in young animals. In some instances,
chronic or intermittent diarrhea, anorexia, and weight

25/04/16 10:33 pm

300

Diseases of specific organ systems

loss may occur. However, in many cases, animals do not
show clinical signs.

Differential diagnosis
Other causes of chronic small bowel diarrhea such as
other parasitoses (e.g. giardiasis), IBD, and alimentary
lymphoma (cat).

Diagnosis
The oocysts are small and difficult to see in fecal preparations. Immunoassays for detection of C. parvum in
human feces have yielded mixed results with feline and
canine samples. A fecal PCR test is available to detect
Cryptosporidium spp. in dogs and cats.

Management
The goal of treatment is to control diarrhea, and underlying diseases such as IBD should be appropriately managed. Feeding a highly digestible diet or an elimination
diet may be beneficial as well. There is no drug with documented efficacy against Cryptosporidium spp. in small
animals. Antibiotics such as azithromycin (10 mg/kg
PO q24h) and tylosin (10–15 mg/kg PO q24h) have been
used with some success. Nitazoxanide was used in naturally infected laboratory cats (25 mg/kg PO q12–24h)
and caused vomiting and foul-smelling dark diarrhea.
However, Cryptosporidium shedding resolved immediately after the drug was administered. Paromomycin
(150 mg/kg PO q12–24 h for 5 days) has also been used
in small animals. However, it does not consistently stop
oocyst shedding, and is also associated with severe renal
failure in cats.

Pathophysiology
Young cats and dogs are predominantly infected by inhalation of microconidia (mycelium). The infection can
remain local (respiratory tract). If it propagates, it generally also involves the GI tract.

Clinical presentation
GI signs include chronic small or large bowel diarrhea.
Weight loss and poor body condition score are common.
Affected animals are sometimes presented with PLE.
Other organ systems may be infected and cause additional clinical signs.

Differential diagnosis
Other causes of chronic diarrhea and weight loss such as
parasite infections, IBD, and alimentary lymphoma (cat).

Diagnosis
The most reliable diagnosis consists in identifying the
organism on cytologic smears from fine needle aspirates
of lymph nodes or from rectal scrapings (Figure 8.73), or
on histologic analysis of intestinal biopsies.

Management
First-line treatment includes itraconazole (10 mg/kg once
daily) and must be continued for 4–6 months and at least
2 months beyond clinical remission.
8.73

Prognosis
Fair to good. While diarrhea usually resolves with or
without therapy in otherwise healthy dogs and cats,
treatment may be challenging in the presence of concurrent diseases.

FUNGAL AND OOMYCETAL ENTERITIS
Histoplasmosis
Etiology
Histoplasma capsulatum is a dimorphic saprophytic fungus that can be found in temperate and subtropical climates. Most cases of canine or feline histoplasmosis
described in the literature come from North America,
particularly from the Ohio, Missouri, and Mississippi river
valleys.

K22463_C008.indd 300

Figure 8.73 Photomicrograph of a fine needle aspirate
of a mesenteric lymph node from a dog with intestinal
histoplasmosis. The arrows point to macrophages filled
with yeast forms of H. capsulatum. Wright–Giemsa stain.
(Courtesy S. Gaunt)

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

Prognosis

301

Guarded to poor in dogs; fair to good in cats.

probably because of their increased risk of environmental exposure.

Pythiosis

Pathophysiology

Etiology
Pythium insidiosum is a eukaryotic microorganism from
the class Oomycota found in subtropical climates (such as
the Southeast and Gulf of Mexico regions of the USA) and
sporadically in other areas. It causes severe, progressive
GI disease. It affects particularly large breed male dogs,
8.74

Motile Pythium zoospores are attracted to and invade
damaged GI mucosa. The disease is characterized by
transmural inflammation that may affect one or more
of the following sites: stomach, small intestine, gastric
antrum, colon, and rectum (rarely the esophagus, see
above) (Figure 8.74). Local lymph nodes are often reactively enlarged.

Clinical presentation
Young, large breed dogs with access to the outdoors are
most commonly affected. History commonly indicates a
progressive illness. Vomiting, diarrhea, and weight loss
(Figure 8.75) are also commonly observed, with possible
dysorexia. In advanced cases, clinical features are suggestive of obstruction of the proximal GI tract, with vomiting
and a palpable intestinal mass. Poor body condition is frequently present. Interestingly, lethargy and other signs of
systemic illness are observed only in advanced cases as a
consequence of complete GI obstruction or GI perforation.

Differential diagnosis
Intestinal FB, histoplasmosis, parasitic enteritis, IBD,
small intestinal neoplasia.

Figure 8.74 Cross-section of a resected jejunal segment
from a 2-year-old mixed-breed dog with intestinal pythiosis.
The wall is severely thickened and the normal structure is not
recognizable. The severe narrowing of the jejunal lumen caused
partial intestinal obstruction. (Courtesy A. Grooters)

8.75

Figure 8.75 Three-year-old male Beagle with a
progressive history of chronic-intermittent vomiting. The
dog has lost weight and is cachectic. Intestinal pythiosis was
diagnosed.

K22463_C008.indd 301

Diagnosis
Peripheral eosinophilia, anemia, hypoalbuminemia, and
hyperglobulinemia may be present. Abdominal imaging:
radiographs may reveal an abdominal mass with or without obstructive pattern (Figure 8.76); ultrasound helps
locate the affected segment, which is characterized by
transmural thickening with disappearance of the normal
small intestinal wall structure (Figure 8.77) and lymph
node enlargement (Figure 8.78). Ultrasound-guided fine
needle aspirates can be performed. An ELISA test for
detection of serum antibodies is available (locations can
be found on the web). Histopathologic diagnosis is granulomatous enteritis affecting mostly the submucosa and
muscularis layers (Figure 8.79). Oomycetal organisms
may be detected with special stains (Figure 8.80) or with
immunohistochemistry. Fresh infected tissue may also be
cultured to confirm the diagnosis.

Management
Aggressive surgical resection of the lesion with 5 cm
clean tissue margins on both sides is the preferred treatment for GI pythiosis. Enlarged abdominal lymph nodes

25/04/16 10:33 pm

302

Diseases of specific organ systems

8.78

8.76

8.77

Figure 8.76–8.78 Two-year-old male Catahoula Cur with
intestinal pythiosis. (8.76) Left lateral abdominal radiograph.
There is an ill-defined central abdominal soft tissue mass
that displaces the intestines dorsally and ventrally. (8. 77)
Abdominal ultrasound. The cross-section of this small
intestinal segment reveals a markedly thickened wall (~3 cm)
with abnormal layering (between asterisks). L, intestinal
lumen. (8.78) Abdominal ultrasound. Note the very enlarged
mesenteric lymph node (between asterisks). The measured
size was 2.2 × 6.4 cm. (Courtesy LSU SVM Diagnostic Imaging
Service)

should be biopsied, but their resection is not absolutely
essential since they are rarely infected. Except in cases
where total resection with 5 cm clean margins could be
performed (usually mid-jejunal masses), medical treatment with a combination of itraconazole (10 mg/kg PO
q24h) and terbinafine (5–10 mg/kg PO q24h) is recommended. Prednisone (1 mg/kg PO q24h) can also be used
to decrease local inflammation and to palliate clinical
signs in the short term. ELISA serology should be performed at the time of diagnosis and 3 months postoperatively, and medical treatment can be discontinued if the
titer decreases by >50%.

Prognosis
Poor, except if complete surgical resection of the GI lesion
is possible. Recurrence is common unless full resection
with clean margins could be achieved. The disease is fatal
if untreated.

K22463_C008.indd 302

CHRONIC CANINE ENTEROPATHIES
Definition/overview
The general term ‘chronic enteropathy’ (CE) has been
used frequently in recent years to describe dogs and
cats with chronic intestinal diseases of unknown origin.
Diet-responsive diarrhea (DRD), antibiotic-responsive
diarrhea (ARD), and IBD are different forms of chronic
enteropathy. They may form a continuum, with DRD
being the mild form of CE and IBD requiring immunosuppressive treatment representing the severe form of the
disease.

Etiology
Based on research in rodent models, people, and dogs, IBD
results from a combination of factors that include dysregulation of the immune system and its interactions with

25/04/16 10:33 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

8.79

303

Terriers, PLE and protein-losing nephropathy in SoftCoated Wheaten Terriers, and cobalamin deficiency in
Shar Peis. German Shepherd Dogs have a high prevalence
of intestinal dysbiosis/ARD and IBD.

Pathophysiology

8.80

Recognition of commensal intestinal microbiota by the
innate immune system is altered. Toll-like receptors (TLRs)
are pattern-recognition receptors located on immune and
epithelial cells that are essential for appropriate recognition of intestinal microbiota. Polymorphisms in various
TLRs have been identified in the intestinal mucosa of dogs
with CE, which may trigger an inflammatory response. In
addition, significant changes in the intestinal microbiota were detected using molecular biological approaches
that do not rely on microbial culture. In dogs and people, IBD reduces the diversity of the intestinal microbiome. Furthermore, in dogs with IBD, the bacterial taxa
Firmicutes (including the Clostridiales), Bacteroidetes,
and Fusobacteria are diminished, and Proteobacteria
(including Enterobacteriacae) are increased. It is not clear
whether these changes are the origin of the intestinal
inflammation or if they reflect the altered environment
in the chronically inflamed gut, or both.

Clinical presentation

Figure 8.79, 8.80 Dog with pythiosis affecting the jejunum.
(8.79) Low-magnification photomicrograph of the intestinal
wall. The mucosa is visible at the top right of the image (arrow);
the deeper structures (submucosa, muscularis) are obliterated
by granulomatous and eosinophilic inflammation. H&E stain.
(8.80) High-magnification photomicrograph of an intestinal
lesion. Infectious organisms with morphology suggestive of
P. insidiosum are nonspecifically stained. Grocott’s methenamine
silver stain. (Courtesy LSU SVM Pathology Service)

intestinal microbiota and/or dietary components, and
compromised integrity of the intestinal mucosal barrier.
Specific forms of IBD have been recognized as occurring more frequently in several canine breeds. For
instance, in the Southeast UK, Weimaraners, Rottweilers,
German Shepherd Dogs, Border Collies, and Boxers were
at increased risk of developing IBD. Examples of established breed associations include lymphangiectasia and
duodenal crypt inflammation with PLE in Yorkshire

K22463_C008.indd 303

Chronic or chronic-intermittent diarrhea of more than
3 weeks’ duration. Mild CE may cause intermittent clinical signs, whereas progressive and severe clinical signs
are common in severe IBD. Poor body condition with poor
hair coat is frequent with severe disease. Dehydration is
possible. Thickened small intestinal loops may occasionally be palpated. Animals may show pain or discomfort on
abdominal palpation. Ascites, hydrothorax, and peripheral edema may occur in cases of significant protein loss
(see Protein-losing enteropathy). Clinical activity scoring
systems have been validated for use in the dog: CIBDAI
(Canine Inflammatory Bowel Disease Activity Index) and
CCECAI (Canine Chronic enteropathy Clinical Activity
Index) (Table 8.11). Clinical activity scoring is useful for
documenting the severity of clinical signs at presentation and for accurate evaluation of clinical response to
treatment.

Differential diagnosis
General differentials include chronic intestinal FB, intestinal parasitoses, bacterial enteritis, fungal enteritis, and
diseases originating outside the GI tract such as chronic
kidney disease, chronic liver disease, chronic pancreatitis, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, and atypical
hypoadrenocorticism.

25/04/16 10:34 pm

304

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 8.11 Clinical activity indices used in dogs with chronic enteropathies.
CIBDAI1

CCECAI2

A: Attitude/activity
0 = normal
1 = slightly decreased
2 = moderate decreased
3 = severely decreased

A+B+C+D+E+F+
G: Serum albumin concentration
0 = >20 g/l
1 = 15–19.9 g/l
2 = 12–14.9 g/l
3 = <12 g/l

B: Appetite
0 = normal
1 = slightly decreased
2 = moderately decreased
3 = severely decreased
C: Vomiting
0 = no vomiting
1 = mild (1 episode/week)
2 = moderate (2–3 episodes /week)
3 = severe (>3 episodes/week)
D: Stool consistency
0 = normal
1 = slightly soft feces
2 = very soft feces
3 = watery diarrhea
E: Stool frequency
0 = normal
1 = slightly increased (2–3 times daily) or fecal blood, mucus
or both
2 = moderately increased (4–5 times daily)
3 = severely increased (>5 times daily)

H: Ascites and peripheral edema
0 = none
1 = mild ascites or peripheral edema
2 =moderate amount of ascites or peripheral edema
3 = severe ascites/pleural effusion and peripheral edema
I: Pruritus
0 = no pruritus
1 = occasional episodes of itching
2 = regular episodes of itching that stop when the dog is
asleep
3 = dog regularly wakes up because of itching
Evaluation of scores:
CCECAI 0–3: no clinical significance
CCECAI 4–5: mild enteropathy
CCECAI 6–8: moderate enteropathy
CCECAI 9–11: severe enteropathy
CCECAI 12 and above: very severe enteropathy

F: Weight loss
0 = none
1 = mild (<5% body weight)
2 = moderate (5–10% body weight)
3 = severe (>10% body weight)
Evaluation of scores:
CIBDAI 0–3: no clinical significance
CIBDAI 4–5: mild IBD
CIBDAI 6–8: moderate IBD
CIBDAI 9 and above: severe IBD
1 Jergens AE, Schreiner CA, Frank DE et al. (2003) A scoring index for disease activity in canine inflammatory bowel disease. J Vet
Intern Med 17:291–297.
2 Allenspach K, Wieland B, Gröne A et al. (2007) Chronic enteropathies in dogs: evaluation of risk factors for negative outcome. J Vet
Int Med 21:700–708.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of CE consists of an elimination process to rule
out other diseases of known etiology that may cause similar clinical signs: fecal flotation and a Giardia antigen test
should be performed in all dogs. Alternatively, empiric
parasiticide treatment can be administered (e.g. fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg q24h for 3–5 days). Subsequently, the

K22463_C008.indd 304

diagnostic process is different for dogs with mild clinical
signs and no evidence of complications such as hypoproteinemia, and for dogs that are more severely affected.
Mildly affected dogs can undergo a treatment trial
with a novel protein or hydrolyzed peptide diet without further diagnostics (see Management, below), while
severely affected dogs should be evaluated more thoroughly with collection of a minimal database including

25/04/16 10:34 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

CBC, serum biochemistry, and urinalysis. Presence of
hypoalbuminemia, often accompanied by hypoglobulinemia, suggests PLE, particularly if other causes can
be ruled out. Sensitivity of abdominal ultrasound is
intermediate, and scans may be normal or show focal or
diffuse loss of wall layering, presence of mucosal striations or spicules, wall thickening, and enlarged and/or
hypoechoic mesenteric lymph nodes. If lesions are present, localization to a specific intestinal segment may be
helpful (Figures 8.81, 8.82).
Upper GI endoscopy and exploratory celiotomy are
both good procedures for collecting intestinal mucosal
biopsy samples, and each offers different advantages and
drawbacks (Table 8.12). Observation of severe mucosal
lesions during duodenoscopy is a negative prognostic
factor.
Procurement of biopsy samples is necessary to further
evaluate disease severity. Biopsy specimens of adequate
quality and quantity are required for accurate interpretation by pathologists. The most important justification for
histology is to rule out a neoplastic infiltrate. However,
it is also useful to evaluate the magnitude of intestinal
mucosal inflammation based on the severity and type of
the infiltrate and the severity of the architectural mucosal changes. A newly established scoring system takes
both architectural and inflammatory mucosal changes
into account. Inflammatory infiltration may be of varying severity and consist of lymphocytes and plasma
cells (lymphoplasmacytic enteritis), eosinophils, neutrophils or macrophages, or combinations thereof (Box 8.9).
Examples of small intestinal mucosal architectural
changes include villus stunting (Figure 8.83), surface epithelial injury, crypt distension (Figure 8.84), lacteal dilation (Figure 8.85), and mucosal fibrosis. It is noteworthy
that in animals responding to treatment, histopathologic
lesions do not seem to improve in correlation with clinical signs. This finding may suggest that CE can be controlled clinically, but not healed.

305

8.81

Figure 8.81 Abdominal ultrasound of a dog with inflammatory
bowel disease, crypt disease, and protein-losing enteropathy.
The normal layers of the intestinal wall are not recognizable in
this oblique section of a small intestinal loop. Hyperechogenic
striations are present and run from the lumen to the serosa.
There is free abdominal fluid. (Courtesy LSU SVM Diagnostic
Imaging Service)
8.82

Management
In most instances, the goal of treatment is to manage the
clinical signs. Full recovery is possible in mild cases.
The standard approach for a dog with mild to moderate chronic recurrent diarrhea of unknown origin without systemic repercussions is to initiate a food trial with
a novel protein or hydrolyzed peptide diet. Many dogs
respond at least partially within 10–14 days (Figure 8.86).
For those who do not, the next step may consist of another
treatment trial with another novel protein or hydrolyzed
peptide diet and/or antimicrobials.

K22463_C008.indd 305

Figure 8.82 Abdominal ultrasound of another dog with severe
inflammatory bowel disease and protein-losing enteropathy.
The normal layers of the intestinal wall are obliterated by an
irregular hyperechogenic pattern. There is free abdominal fluid.
(Courtesy LSU SVM Diagnostic Imaging Service)

While dysbiosis (change in the composition of the
intestinal microbiota) occurs in most dogs with IBD, a
subset of young large breed dogs with CE (particularly

25/04/16 10:34 pm

306

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 8.12 Advantages and drawbacks of endoscopy and surgery for collecting intestinal mucosal biopsies.
Endoscopy

Celiotomy

Availabilty of equipment

Limited

Universal

General anesthesia required

Yes

Yes

Rapidity

Depends on endoscopist’s experience

Depends on surgeon’s experience

Access to gastrointestinal tract

Stomach, duodenum, sometimes
proximal jejunum, ileum, colon

Whole GI tract. Full-thickness biopsies of
the colon are a more risky procedure

Access to other abdominal organs

No

Yes

Evaluation of intestinal mucosa

Yes

No

Quantity of biopsies

++ to +++

+

Quality of biopsies

+ to +++

+++

Associated risks of complication

Very rare

Minimal, but present, particularly in case
of severe panhypoproteinemia

Postinterventional recovery

Rapid

Longer

8.83
Box 8.9 Further considerations with different types of
intestinal infiltrates.
Lymphoplasmacytic enteritis: most common type of
inflammatory infiltrate, nonspecific. A mild to moderate
lymphoplasmacytic mucosal infiltrate may be present in
the absence of clinical signs.
Eosinophilic enteritis: rule out parasitic enteritis or a­ llergic
causes, and in cats eosinophilic syndrome. Idiopathic
eosinophilic enteritis may occur in dogs and cats. While it
usually responds well to steroids in dogs, this disorder is
often steroid resistant in cats.
Neutrophilic (or suppurative) enteritis: bacterial
­infectious component cannot be ruled out, and treatment
with broad-spectrum antibiotic should be considered alone
or in association with immunosuppressive drugs.
Granulomatous enteritis: rule out fungal enteritis.
Idiopathic transmural granulomatous enteritis usually
carries a poor prognosis.

but not exclusively German Shepherd Dogs) respond to
prolonged treatment with antimicrobials such as tylosin
(20 mg/kg PO q12h) or metronidazole (10–15 mg/kg PO
q12h). This may result from an inability of these dogs’
immune systems to interact adequately with their intestinal microbiota. Clinical experience accumulated over
the past decades indicates that prolonged treatment (4–8
weeks) is necessary, and that relapses are not uncommon.

K22463_C008.indd 306

Figure 8.83 Photomicrograph of the duodenal mucosa of a
10–year-old female spayed Domestic Shorthair cat with chronic
inflammatory bowel disease. There is marked blunting and
fusion of the intestinal villi (compared with Figure 8.52), and a
moderate lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate. H&E stain.

In refractory cases, and in dogs with severe disease
and evidence of systemic involvement, a more thorough
work up with acquisition of a minimal database should
be initiated (see Diagnosis, above).

25/04/16 10:34 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

8.84

307

8.86

PLE 14%

IBD 30%

DRD 56%

Figure 8.84 Photomicrograph of the duodenal mucosa of
a dog with protein-losing enteropathy. Two intestinal crypts
are markedly distended and filled with necrotic material. The
diagnosis was moderate lymphocytic plasmacytic duodenitis
with severe crypt lesions. H&E stain.

8.85

Figure 8.85 Photomicrograph of the duodenal mucosa of a
Yorkshire Terrier with protein-losing enteropathy. The villus is
markedly distended and dilated lacteals partially filled with
eosinophilic material are visible. The diagnosis was moderate
idiopathic lymphangiectasia. H&E stain.

K22463_C008.indd 307

Figure 8.86 Pie chart summarizing the data from a study
that included 70 dogs with chronic enteropathy referred to the
University of Bern Veterinary Teaching Hospital. 56% of dogs
responded within 10 days to a novel protein diet (DRD, dietresponsive diarrhea), while 30% required steroid treatment, and
14% had severe protein-losing enteropathy. (Source: Allenspach
K, Wieland B, Gröne A et al. (2007) Chronic enteropathies in
dogs: evaluation of risk factors for negative outcome. J Vet
Intern Med 21:700–708.)

In dogs with histopathologic evidence of IBD, immunosuppressive doses of prednisone or prednisolone
(Table 8.13) are generally the mainstay of initial treatment. Initially, very high doses (e.g. 2 mg/kg q12h) are
recommended for a few days, followed by a regular immunosuppressive dose (2 mg/kg/day, in 1 dose or divided
into 2 doses). Dietary treatment consists of hydrolyzed
peptide or novel protein diet, which has been shown to
be superior to easily digestible low-fat diet for long-term
maintenance of remission in moderate to severe canine
IBD. A recheck is scheduled after 1–2 weeks to reassess
the situation. In cases showing good response, the dose
of prednisone should be maintained for another 2 weeks,
then slowly decreased in 2–4-week steps.
Treatment failure should prompt the clinician to
review the diagnosis and ascertain that no mistakes
or erroneous assumptions were made in the diagnostic
process. Refractory IBD patients must be examined thoroughly to detect intercurrent diseases that may be contributing to treatment failure. For instance, a significant
proportion of dogs with IBD (particularly those with
PLE) may develop hypocobalaminemia because of severe
involvement of the distal small intestine. Cobalamin

25/04/16 10:34 pm

308

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 8.13 Dosage of oral immunosuppressive drugs used in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease in small animals.
Drug

Canine dose

Feline dose

Side-effects

Prednisone, prednisolone

1–2 mg/kg q12–24h

Prednisolone preferred. Same
dose as canine

In dogs they include polyuria/
polydipsia, panting, alopecia,
pot-bellied appearance,
calcinosis cutis. Rare in cats,
may cause diabetes mellitus

Budesonide

3 mg/m2 q24h

1 mg/cat q24h

Same as above

Azathioprine

Initially 2 mg/kg q24h for 3
weeks, then 1–2 mg/kg q48h. Up
to 3 weeks of treatment may be
necessary for the drug to reach
maximal effect

Do not use in cats

Hepatotoxicity, pancreatitis,
rarely bone marrow
suppression

Chlorambucil

Initially 4–6 mg/m2 q24h for the
first 7–21 days, then the dose
can be decreased by 25–33%, or
the dosage interval increased to
every 2–3 days

2 mg/cat 3 times weekly

Rarely bone marrow
suppression

Cyclosporine

5 mg/kg q12–24h

Same as canine

Vomiting, nausea, gingival
hyperplasia

deficiency may cause a delayed response or lack of
response to adequately designed immunosuppressive
treatment. Serum cobalamin concentration should be
determined. Subcutaneous supplementation is essential
in these animals (Table 8.14). Relatively frequently, dogs
with moderate to severe IBD require treatment with a
combination of immunosuppressive agents (Table 8.13).
In cases with unacceptable corticosteroid side-effects,
another immunosuppressive drug may be added in the
hope of decreasing the prednisone dose. Alternatively,
budesonide can be used. Budesonide is a glucocorticoid
that undergoes high first-pass hepatic metabolism after
intestinal absorption, but still affects the pituitary–
adrenal axis. Budesonide may cause fewer side-effects
than prednisone; it has been used in large breed dogs,
which tend to be more prone to severe polyuria and
polydipsia. There is no documented benefit in using
the controlled release formulation compared with the
generic substance.

Prognosis
Good in mild cases that respond to dietary trials. Return
to a less expensive commercial food may be possible after
2–3 months of dietary treatment; however, some dogs
require life-long administration of an elimination diet.
Guarded to poor in dogs requiring medical treatment.

K22463_C008.indd 308

Table 8.14 Treatment protocol for hypocobalaminemic dogs
and cats with chronic enteropathy.
Dose per SC injection
Cats:

Any weight

250 μg

Dogs:

<4.5 kg

250 μg

4.5–9 kg

400 μg

9–18 kg

600 μg

18–27 kg

800 μg

27–36 kg

1,000 μg

36–45 kg

1,200 μg

>45 kg

1,500 μg

Schedule:
Administer once weekly dose for 6 weeks, then one dose
30 days later. Recheck serum cobalamin 30 days after the
last injection. If it is:
•• Above the reference range, and the underlying process
has been successfully managed, discontinue cobalamin
injections.
•• Within the reference range, continue monthly treatment.
•• Below the reference range: reassess the patient.
Source: Texas A&M University GI Laboratory website (http://
vetmed.tamu.edu/gilab), with permission.

25/04/16 10:34 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

PROTEIN-LOSING ENTEROPATHY

309

Clinical presentation

Definition/overview
Intestinal protein loss is a sign of failure of digestive function that may result from severe acute or chronic inflammatory lesions or from a disruption of chyle absorption
and intestinal lymph flow.

Etiology/pathophysiology
Primary intestinal lymphangiectasia occurs preferentially in Yorkshire Terriers, Shar Peis, Maltese, Norwegian
Lundehunds, and Rottweilers. The pathogenesis of primary intestinal lymphangiectasia is still poorly understood. It results from obstruction to the flow of lymph
in the intestinal wall. Secondary intestinal lymphangiectasia is commonly associated with significant intestinal mucosal inflammation (e.g. IBD) and neoplasia
­(alimentary lymphoma).
IBD may also directly cause PLE. The inflammatory
process located in the GI mucosa may lead to protein loss
both by preventing absorption of nutrients and by compromising the integrity of the intestinal mucosal barrier,
leading to exudation of proteins into the intestinal lumen.
PLE of Soft-Coated Wheaten Terriers is a specific form of
IBD affecting this breed worldwide. In approximately
50% of these dogs, PLE and protein-losing nephropathy
(PLN) occur concurrently, and the pathogenesis includes
a hypersensitivity component.
Crypt dilation and necrosis have been frequently
associated with PLE. Dogs with small intestinal crypt
abscesses have significant hypoalbuminemia and ultrasound changes of their intestinal mucosa, and their
­clinical presentation is generally severe.

Chronic intermittent small intestinal diarrhea with
possible vomiting is a common presentation. In severe
cases, dysorexia/anorexia and malnutrition with evidence of malabsorption and weight loss may be observed
(Figure 8.87). Importantly, significant intestinal protein
loss and hypoalbuminemia may also occur without obvious diarrheic episodes. In the presence of severe hypoalbuminemia (serum albumin <2.0 g/dl, often ≤1.5 g/dl),
the main complaint may relate to significantly decreased
oncotic pressure causing cavitary effusion (Figure 8.88)
and ­subcutaneous edema (Figure 8.89).

8.88

Figure 8.88 Ten-year-old female spayed English Bulldog
with chronic inflammatory bowel disease and protein-losing
enteropathy. The abdomen is severely distended due to ascites.
The dog also had pleural effusion.

8.89
8.87

Figure 8.87 Four-year-old male neutered Maltipoo with
severe chronic inflammatory bowel disease and protein-losing
enteropathy. The dog is cachectic and a pot-bellied abdomen is
visible (ascites).

K22463_C008.indd 309

Figure 8.89 One-year-old male Montagne des Pyrenées with
inflammatory bowel disease and protein-losing enteropathy.
There is subcutaneous edema around both hocks. (Courtesy R.
Husnik)

25/04/16 10:34 pm

310

Diseases of specific organ systems

Differential diagnosis

8.90

Hypoalbuminemia and associated signs may also occur
with liver failure, PLN, third spacing of proteins (vas­
culitis), or cutaneous loss.

Diagnosis
First, the origin of the protein loss should be established
by ruling out other processes. Generally, PLE is associated
with panhypoproteinemia due to nonselective protein
loss, but exceptions may occur. Other common abnormalities of dogs with PLE include hypocholesterolemia,
hypocalcemia (total and ionized), hypomagnesemia, and
lymphopenia.
Once the GI tract has been confirmed as the site of
protein loss, further work up should include abdominal
ultrasound, a technique with acceptable sensitivity that
often helps assess the severity and anatomic distribution
of intestinal lesions. Hyperechogenic mucosal striations
are frequently observed in dogs with PLE, and appear to
be quite specific (see Figure 8.81).
Endoscopy may reveal a broad range of changes of
varying severity (Figures 8.90, 8.91). The diagnosis of the
cause of PLE requires histopathologic analysis of intestinal biopsies (see Figures 8.84, 8.85). In some instances,
dogs with severe hypoalbuminemia are poor anesthetic
candidates, and it is sometimes preferable to avoid taking excessive risks and postpone endoscopy or surgery.
Additionally, many dogs with PLE have bicavitary effusion, and thoracic radiographs are recommended as a
screening tool for the presence of thoracic effusion, which
may represent an additional anesthetic risk.

Figure 8.90 Endoscopic picture from the duodenum of the
same dog as in Figure 8.81. The surface of the intestinal mucosa
is very irregular and abnormal, and patches of recognizable villi
are visible (arrows).
8.91

Management
Dogs with PLE are in a catabolic state, and adequate
nutrition is essential. In dogs with primary idiopathic
intestinal lymphangiectasia, dietary modification centers on feeding a highly digestible diet with low to very
low fat content (10–15% on a dry matter basis) to prevent
further dilation and rupture of lacteals. Additionally, the
diet should contain highly bioavailable dietary proteins
and be low in crude fiber. Dietary therapy should probably be maintained for the length of the dog’s life. In dogs
with PLE associated with underlying IBD, good success
has been reported with exclusive feeding of a diet consisting of hydrolyzed proteins. Novel protein diets are an
alternative approach.
In dogs with primary intestinal lymphangiectasia,
anti-inflammatory glucocorticoid therapy (e.g. prednisone, 1 mg/kg/day) is useful and often required for
proper management of the disease. The main desired
effect is to decrease the inflammation associated with
lipogranulomas secondary to chyle leakage and therefore

K22463_C008.indd 310

Figure 8.91 Endoscopic view of the duodenum of a 5-year-old
Yorkshire Terrier. There are numerous multifocal white spots in
the mucosa that represent dilated villi filled with chyme. The
histopathologic diagnosis was idiopathic lymphangiectasia.

help restore an adequate flow in the intestinal lymphatics. In some dogs, anti-inflammatory treatment
can be slowly weaned off over 2–3 months or longer.

25/04/16 10:34 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

311

8.92

Immunosuppression is the basis for treatment of severe
IBD with PLE (Table 8.13).

Complications
Low serum cobalamin concentrations are commonly
found in dogs with PLE, especially in the presence of
underlying IBD, and may delay proper healing of intestinal inflammation. Treatment consists of weekly SC injections of vitamin B12 (Table 8.14).
Recent studies have revealed the high prevalence of
hypercoagulability in dogs with PLE, which increases
the risk of potentially fatal thromboembolic events.
Hypercoagulability does not appear to resolve after
successful treatment of PLE. Administration of low
doses of aspirin (0.5–1 mg/kg/day) and/or clopidogrel
(1–5 mg/kg/day) may be considered in order to prevent
thrombosis.
The decrease in serum total calcium is associated with
severe hypoalbuminemia. Additionally, low serum ionized calcium concentration occur in association with low
25-hydroxyvitamin D and increased levels of parathyroid
hormone in dogs with PLE. In dogs with a moderate to
severe decrease in ionized calcium, treatment with calcium and vitamin D is recommended. Concurrent hypomagnesemia may compromise the success of treatment
and should be corrected if present.

Prognosis
Generally, hypoalbuminemia (serum albumin <2 g/dl) is
associated with a less favorable outcome. A few studies
show a high mortality among Yorkshire Terriers with
intestinal lymphangiectasia (50–60%). In the author’s
practice, some Yorkshire Terriers with idiopathic intestinal lymphangiectasia respond well to a strict diet
alone or with anti-inflammatory doses of glucocorticoids. There are no known parameters that allow early
­segregation of dogs likely to be refractory to dietary and
steroid treatment. Crypt abscesses in the small intestine
are associated with significantly shorter survival.

CHRONIC FELINE ENTEROPATHY
Definiton/overview
While the etiology and pathophysiology are thought to
be similar to canine CE, the presentation and approach of
cats with CE is partially different.

Clinical presentation
The most commonly observed clinical signs are vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, and weight loss (Figure 8.92).
However, some cats may have a normal to increased appetite, and many cats, unlike dogs, will not have diarrhea at

K22463_C008.indd 311

Figure 8.92 Fourteen-year-old male neutered Domestic
Longhair cat with chronic diarrhea and occasional vomiting. The
cat is lethargic, cachectic, and his hair coat is in poor condition.
Inflammatory bowel disease and alimentary lymphoma are
among the top differentials.

presentation. Other cats will be presented for dysorexia/
anorexia and weight loss. The signs are often waxing and
waning, and the owners may seek veterinary attention
only late in the course of disease. Abnormal findings on
physical examination of cats with CE include loss of body
condition, dehydration, palpation of thickened bowel
loops, and/or abdominal pain.

Differential diagnosis
Includes diseases originating outside the digestive tract
such as hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, and heartworm disease, but also liver disease
and pancreatitis. Alimentary lymphoma, particularly diffusely infiltrative low-grade alimentary lymphoma, may
be very difficult to differentiate from IBD.

Diagnosis
The clinical signs may be very nonspecific, and the
first step is to rule out diseases that may present with
a similar clinical picture. A minimal database of CBC,
chemistry profile, serum thyroxin concentration, and
abdominal imaging (particularly ultrasound) is recommended. Confirmation of diagnosis requires histologic evaluation of intestinal biopsies collected using
­endoscopy or celiotomy (Table 8.12, Figure 8.83).

Management
As is the case in dogs, a high proportion of cats with CE
may respond to an appropriate diet change (e.g. novel
protein or hydrolyzed peptides). Other cats may respond
to antimicrobials: metronidazole (10–15 mg/kg PO q12h)
is popular, although its therapeutic margin in cats is narrow. Tylosin (20–40 mg/kg PO q12h) is a good alternative.
Both drugs also have immunomodulating effects.
Immunosuppressive therapy is the mainstay of IBD
treatment. It is best initiated when histologic evidence
of intestinal mucosal infiltration is available, but could

25/04/16 10:34 pm

312

Diseases of specific organ systems

also be the final option of the empirical treatment
sequence started with dietary trial and antimicrobials.
Prednisolone (2–4 mg/kg PO q24h or divided into 2 daily
doses) is administered for 10–14 days. Once the clinical
signs have been controlled for 2 weeks or longer, the dose
is reduced by one-half every 10–14 days. The final goal is
to maintain the cat on the lowest effective dose, or even
to consider discontinuation of steroid treatment if feasible. If the owner is unable to pill the cat, methylprednisolone acetate can be given (10 mg/kg SC q2–4weeks, and
tapered to q4–8weeks). Repository steroids may cause
more side-effects and do not appear to be very successful
in the author’s experience. Refractory cases are usually
treated with chlorambucil or cyclosporine (Table 8.13).
Chlorambucil is generally used in combination with
prednisolone (2 mg/cat PO every other day [in cats >4 kg
body weight] or every 3 days [in cats <4 kg body weight]
and then tapered to the lowest effective dose). A CBC
should be checked every 2–4 weeks for signs of myelosuppression. Although there are no published reports
of cyclosporine use in cats with IBD, the dose generally
recommended is approximately 5 mg/kg once daily
(25 mg/cat).

corticotrophin releasing factor. They may be complicated
by the use of opiates for analgesia.

Prognosis

Proper diagnosis and treatment of any underlying disease that might affect gastric motility is an essential
premise. Therapy of functional, nonobstructive disorders
of gastric motility is based on dietary modification and
judicious use of prokinetic drugs. Dietary management
is attempted at first: small amounts of a low-fat, low­protein diet given at frequent intervals can help reduce
the symptoms of delayed gastric emptying. Medical therapy can be attempted if dietary management alone is
unsuccessful (Table 8.9).

In one study, 80% of cats with IBD treated with diet
change and prednisone had a positive response to
treatment, although clinical signs did not completely
resolve. Cats with severe histologic lesions or eosinophilic inflammation may be more difficult to manage.
Failure to respond to treatment may indicate refractory
IBD or lymphoma. Feline IBD is a disease that is managed but rarely cured.

PARALYTIC ILEUS
Etiology
Primary nonobstructive disorders of intestinal motility
are rare. Secondary alterations in motility of the small
intestine occur with many diseases. Enteritis is associated
with abnormal intestinal motility patterns that resolve
with successful treatment of the inflammation. Intestinal
hypomotility and ileus may occur after abdominal surgery (postoperative ileus [POI]) or during ischemic or
inflammatory conditions affecting abdominal organs,
such as peritonitis, pancreatitis, or parvovirus infection.
Hyperthyroidism in cats may also alter intestinal transit
time and cause diarrhea.

Pathophysiology
POI is thought to be due to inhibition of neural pathways and release of proinflammatory mediators and

K22463_C008.indd 312

Clinical presentation
Vomiting, bloated abdomen, abdominal discomfort or
pain, and/or signs of colic. Hyporexia/anorexia, nausea,
increased belching, pica, and/or polydipsia may also be
observed.

Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses are numerous. Small intestinal
obstruction (see above) can result in a very similar presentation, and all necessary steps must be taken to rule
it out. Autonomic neuropathy (dysautonomia) is a rare
disease, but should also be considered in the appropriate
clinical setting.

Diagnosis
Physical signs, abdominal radiographs often show dilated
small intestinal segments in the absence of an obstructive pattern (see Figure 8.61). Precise evaluation of small
intestinal motility is difficult under clinical conditions.

Management

Prognosis
Generally good if the problem is secondary to an underlying disease that can be treated successfully. Idiopathic
disorders of small intestinal motility often represent a
therapeutic challenge.

MALIGNANT SMALL INTESTINAL
NEOPLASIA
Etiology
In dogs, small intestinal tumors occur relatively frequently (1–8% of all canine cancers). Epithelial tumors
include adenocarcinoma, mucinous adenocarcinoma,
ring cell carcinoma, and undifferentiated carcinoma
and represent 29% of all small intestinal tumors, as does
lymphoma. Furthermore, 23% of small bowel neoplasms
are leiomyosarcoma. These tumors may metastasize to

25/04/16 10:34 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

mesenteric lymph nodes, liver, peritoneum, and lungs
(adenocarcinoma metastasis rate is ~50%).
In cats, small intestinal tumors are also relatively common (6–13.5% of all feline cancers), and consist mostly of
alimentary lymphoma (74%) and adenocarcinoma (17%).
Siamese cats appear to be predisposed. Depending on the
source, between one-third and three-quarters of all feline
lymphomas are localized in the GI tract. Two main forms
are recognized: low-grade alimentary lymphoma (LGAL),
which causes a diffuse infiltration of the intestinal wall
and consists of T cells; and high-grade alimentary lymphoma (HGAL) which causes focal or segmental disease
and consists of B cells.

Pathophysiology
The cause of intestinal neoplasia in dogs and cats is
unknown. An association between alimentary lymphoma
and chronic inflammation (IBD) has been hypothesized
in cats but not demonstrated.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs develop late in the course of disease. They
include chronic progressive vomiting, small bowel diarrhea, hyporexia/anorexia, and melena. An abdominal
mass is palpable in 50% of cases with a discrete neoplasm.
In diffusely infiltrative tumors, thickening of the small
intestinal wall may also be palpable. Enlarged abdominal lymph nodes may also be detected. Clinical features
of cats with LGAL may be identical to those of cats with
IBD (Figure 8.92).

313

8.93

Figure 8.93 Low-power photomicrograph of a resected jejunal
segment from a cat with alimentary lymphoma. The very severe
infiltration with small lymphocytes extends through all layers
of the wall. Inflammatory infiltrates generally do not extend
beyond the muscularis mucosae. H&E stain.
8.94

Differential diagnosis
For occlusive tumors, intestinal FB, granulomatous disease
(e.g. pythiosis), other cause of vomiting such as pancreatitis,
metabolic disease (e.g. chronic kidney disease). Feline IBD is
the most common differential diagnosis for cats with LGAL.

Diagnosis
It may be very difficult to differentiate cats with moderate
to severe IBD from those with LGAL. Collection of intestinal biopsies of adequate size for histopathologic interpretation is essential but does not guarantee that a final
diagnosis will be reached (Figure 8.93). There is ongoing
debate regarding the value of endoscopy (Figure 8.94)
versus surgery in obtaining the samples (Table 8.12).
Special immunohistochemistry stains (Figure 8.95) and
PCR for antigen receptor rearrangement can be of further
help in attempting to confirm a diagnosis of LGAL.
CBC may reveal anemia (chronic disease or blood
loss), serum chemistry may show hypoalbuminemia and
increased liver enzymes. An obstructive pattern may be

K22463_C008.indd 313

Figure 8.94 Endoscopic view of the duodenal mucosa from a
cat with low-grade alimentary lymphoma. The mucosa appears
irregular and granular. Changes could be similar in cats with
inflammatory bowel disease. (Courtesy R. Husnik)

seen on abdominal radiographs; thoracic films may reveal
metastases. Abdominal ultrasound is the most sensitive
imaging method. It allows evaluation of ­localization, size,
and extent of the mass, and can be used to guide fine
­needle aspiration for cytologic evaluation.

25/04/16 10:34 pm

314

Diseases of specific organ systems

Management

8.95

In the absence of distant metastases, surgical resection
with appropriate margins is the treatment of choice
for most small intestinal tumors, with the exception of
feline LGAL.
LGAL can be treated efficiently with a combination of
prednisolone and chlorambucil (Table 8.13). Between 55%
and 76% of cats achieve complete remission with a median
survival time (MST) of 19–29 months. Chemotherapy for
HGAL is best initiated after the mass has been resected.
The CHOP protocol, consisting of prednisolone, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin, is preferred.
The rate of complete remission is 38–87%, with a MST of
8 months.

Prognosis
Canine adenocarcinoma carries a good prognosis with
>2 year survival documented in the absence of metastases and with clean margins, and a MST of 15 months.
In cases with metastasis, the MST is usually significantly
shorter (3 months). In cats, survival ranges from 5 to 13
months. The benefit of postsurgical chemotherapy has
not been scientifically evaluated. MST for canine leiomyosarcoma with or without metastasis ranges from 9 to
22 months.

Part 5: Diseases of the large intestine
Overview

Figure 8.95 Photomicrograph of a small intestinal villus
from a cat with low-grade alimentary lymphoma stained with
antibodies against CD3, a T-cell marker. There are numerous
cells that stain positive. T-cell alimentary lymphoma was
diagnosed.

8.96

Inflammatory diseases of the colon are frequently
encountered in dogs and are less common in cats. In
many instances, acute nonspecific colitis is self-limiting.
Chronic colitis is often associated with a long, sometimes
waxing and waning clinical course and specific treatments. Constipation is an uncommon clinical sign usually
encountered in older animals, and appears to affect cats
more frequently than dogs.

Anatomy and physiology of the large intestine
The large intestine consists of six segments: cecum
(a short blind pouch), ascending colon, transverse colon,
descending colon, rectum, and anus. The ileocolic valve
and its sphincter separate the distal small intestine and
the large intestine (Figure 8.96). The microscopic structure of the large intestine resembles that of the small
intestine. However, the large intestinal mucosa does not
form villi, the epithelial cells have fewer microvilli on their
apical surface than enterocytes, and numerous goblet
cells are interspersed in the epithelial layer (Figure 8.97).
The colon has two main functions: water absorption,
which takes place in the proximal colon, and storage
and elimination of feces. Colonic motility includes a few

K22463_C008.indd 314

Figure 8.96 Endoscopic view from the ascending colon of a
dog. The ileocolic junction (1) and the entrance to the cecum
(2) are visible. (Courtesy R. Husnik)

patterns with different functions: stationary contractions
mix the content and indirectly promote water absorption
and peristaltic contractions move the feces aborally over

25/04/16 10:34 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

8.97

Figure 8.97 Photomicrograph of the canine colonic mucosa.
The arrows point to a few of the numerous goblet cells. Mucus
can be observed on the surface of the epithelium and in the
colonic crypts. There is mild expansion of the lamina propria,
with lymphoplasmacytic inflammation. C, colonic crypts;
L, lumen; MM, muscularis mucosae.

small distances. Eventually, giant contractions precede
defecation and move feces over longer segments. The gastrocolic reflex is mediated by enteric nerves and enhances
colonic motility after a meal, leading to defecation.

315

8.98

Figure 8.98 Endoscopic view of the colon of a 5-year-old
mixed-breed dog with whipworm-induced colitis. The dog had
severe bloody mucoid diarrhea for more than a week. Three
consecutive fecal examinations were negative for parasitic ova.
At endoscopy the mucosa was friable and hemorrhagic, with
large numbers of Trichuris attached to the mucosa (arrow). The
dog was treated with fenbendazole and sulfasalazine and made
a good recovery.

CECAL DISEASES
Diseases of the cecum are rarely recognized as a separate entity in cats and dogs. However, the cecum is
the preferred place of residence of adult whipworms.
Additionally, colonic inflammation can extend to the
cecum and cause typhlitis. Clinical signs are characterized by large bowel diarrhea, which cannot be differentiated from colitis.

ACUTE COLITIS
parasitic colitis (whipworms)
Definition/overview
As stated earlier, the CAPC maintains a very informative
and freely accessible website on intestinal parasites of
small animals and this should be consulted for additional
information (www.capcvet.org).

Etiology
Trichuris vulpis is a common cause of large bowel diarrhea
in dogs. Whipworm infestation in cats is rare, and caused
by T. campanula and T. serrata. The infection mode is fecaloral. Eggs develop into larvae in the small intestine and

K22463_C008.indd 315

larvae ultimately migrate to the cecum and colon, where
they develop to adult worms (Figure 8.98).

Pathophysiology
Adult whipworms feed on cecal and colonic epithelial
cells. Severe typhlitis and colitis may occur with heavy
infestations; however, many dogs infested with few whipworms do not show clinical signs.

Clinical presentation
Acute or chronic large bowel diarrhea that may occur in
dogs of all ages. Severely affected animals may present
with lethargy, hyporexia, and dehydration. Abdominal
discomfort or abdominal pain due to accumulation of
gas in the large intestinal lumen may also be present.
Rarely, whipworm infested dogs may show hyperkalemia and hyponatremia, which is suggestive of hypoadrenocorticism, even though their adrenal glands are fully
functional.

Differential diagnosis
Other causes of acute colitis (dietary, idiopathic) or chronic
colitis (IBD, granulomatous colitis). In the presence of
hyperkalemia and hyponatremia, hypoadrenocorticism.

25/04/16 10:34 pm

316

Diseases of specific organ systems

Diagnosis

Clinical presentation

Fecal flotation allows identification of the bipolar operculated eggs (Figure 8.99). However, fecal shedding of ova
may only occur intermittently, particularly if immature
worms are involved. Therefore, repeated fecal examinations usually increase the diagnostic yield. Alternatively,
empirical treatment may be initiated with a broad-­
spectrum anthelminthic (see below). Further diagnostic
testing is generally not required with the exception of
severely dehydrated dogs and animals with pre-existing
conditions. In dogs with recurrent episodes of acute diarrhea, a more detailed work up may be indicated.

Large bowel diarrhea with all typical components including hematochezia (see Figure 2.6.3), mucoid feces (see
Figure 2.6.5), and tenesmus (Figure 8.100), as listed in
Table 2.6.1. Acute nonspecific colitis may occur in dogs of
any age.

Management
Fenbendazole (50 mg/kg/day for 3 days) or febantel
(25 mg/kg once) are the anthelminthic drugs of choice.
Because immature adults and larval stages are less sensitive to the drugs, treatment should be repeated 3 weeks
later and again after 3 months. Milbemycin oxime and
moxidectin used monthly to prevent heartworm infection are also useful for prevention and treatment of
whipworm infestations. Whipworm ova are resistant to
unfavorable environmental conditions and may represent a problem in shelter situations.

ACUTE IDIOPATHIC COLITIS
Etiology
Unknown. Some form of dietary indiscretion is usually
present.

Pathophysiology
Colonic inflammation is associated with decreased nonpropulsive motility and excessive propulsive motility
that results in diarrhea with frequent defecation of feces
of decreased consistency.

Diagnosis
Elimination of known causes of acute colitis such as whipworm infestation and C. perfringens infection.

Management
The disease is usually self-limiting. Mild cases may not
require any treatment. Moderate cases respond well to
symptomatic treatment that includes dietary manipulations with a 12–24-hour fasting period. An easily digestible low residue diet should be fed for 48–72
hours (small meals several times daily), with progressive return to a good quality commercial diet over the
following 48–72 hours. Systematic use of antimicrobials
in cases of acute nonspecific colitis is not recommended
because increases in the resistance of C. perfringens to
metronidazole have been reported and are concerning.
Metronidazole has been commonly used in the treatment
of acute colitis because of its effects on the intestinal
microbiome, its properties as a modulator of inflammation, and its spectrum against anaerobic infections. The
use of probiotics provides a good alternative to antimicrobials (Box 8.7).
In cases with clinical evidence of dehydration, IV fluids should be administered using balanced isotonic
crystalloid solutions at appropriate rates in order to

8.100

8.99

Figure 8.99 T. vulpis egg. The egg is lemon-shaped with a plug
(operculum) at each pole. (Courtesy B. Delcambre)

K22463_C008.indd 316

Figure 8.100 Tenesmus in a 2-year-old Boxer with chronic
colitis. When walked the dog immediately attempted to
defecate. It remained in this position for more than 2 minutes
and produced only a small quantity of liquid feces.

25/04/16 10:34 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

rapidly replace fluid deficits and provide maintenance
requirements. In dogs with severe acute colitis and consistent abdominal pain, analgesic treatment should be
considered.

317

Clinical presentation

CHRONIC COLITIS

The disease affects young cats, with onset between birth
and 2 years of age. Seventy-five percent or more of
affected cats are younger than 1 year of age at the time
of diagnosis. Affected cats either live or have lived in a
large multi-cat household. Typical clinical signs include
waxing and waning large bowel diarrhea, which may
contain mucus and blood. The feces are soft and malodorous (Figure 8.101). Secondary anal inflammation may be
observed.

FUNGAL AND OOMYCETAL COLITIS

Differential diagnosis

Prognosis
Good to excellent. The disease is generally self-limiting or
it responds well to symptomatic treatment.

Overview
Animals infected with histoplasmosis may show signs
of large bowel diarrhea. Rectal scraping or fine needle
aspiration of enlarged abdominal lymph nodes may be
diagnostic and reveal large numbers of fungal organisms
phagocytized by macrophages (see Figure 8.73). Pythiosis
is caused by an oomycetal organism and may occasionally diffusely infiltrate the colonic and rectal wall and
cause severe clinical signs. The prognosis is generally
poor (see Figure 8.74).
Further details about histoplasmosis and pythiosis can
be found in Part 4: Diseases of the small intestine.

PARASITIC COLITIS
whipworms
(See Acute colitis.)

In shelter or other large multi-cat household situations,
other infectious diseases such as infestation with Giardia
or Cryptosporidium (see Chronic enteritis), alone or in
combination, may also occur. However, these protozoa
more often cause small intestinal or mixed diarrhea. In
spite of the young age of cats with suspect T. foetus infections, CE should also be considered (DRD, IBD).

Diagnosis
Three methods are available for detection of T. foetus in
the feces. Direct analysis of fresh feces after dilution with
saline is an insensitive method (14%), but may yield a
positive result in diarrheic feces of severely affected cats
(Figure 8.102). Feces are best sampled by flushing the
colon with saline, and should be analyzed within 2 hours.
Under the microscope, T. foetus trophozoites may be misdiagnosed as Giardia; however, they have a characteristic
8.101

trichomoniasis
Etiology
Tritrichomonas foetus is a protozoal organism associated
with chronic, recurring feline colitis in large multi-cat
households. Most affected cats come from shelters or
belong to breeders, and it is suspected that environmental stress plays a role in their susceptibility to the infection. Co-infections with Giardia are common. T. foetus is
not very resistant in the environment and direct fecal–
oral contact is required for transmission (e.g. multi-cat
litterbox).

Pathophysiology
T. foetus live in the cecum, descending colon, and ileum,
and may cause lymphoplasmacytic and/or neutrophilic
inflammation of the mucosa with secondary architectural changes.

K22463_C008.indd 317

Figure 8.101 Soft and malodorous diarrhea from a cat with
T. foetus infection. (Courtesy M.K. Tolbert)

25/04/16 10:34 pm

318

Diseases of specific organ systems

8.102

Ronidazole treatment is most efficacious in animals relocated to single-cat households, as the risk for reinfection
is low.

CHRONIC IDIOPATHIC COLITIS
diet-responsive chronic colitis
Overview

Figure 8.102 Microphotograph of stained T. foetus
trophozoites. (Courtesy M.K. Tolbert)

forward motion that contrasts with the ‘falling leaf’
motion of Giardia trophozoites. Another method is to
inject a small amount of fresh feces into a special culture
medium (Feline In Pouch®) and evaluate the medium
under the microscope at daily intervals for the presence
of T. foetus trophozoites. The sensitivity of culture is intermediate (55%). Fecal PCR is the most sensitive method to
detect T. foetus when the samples are collected adequately.
Recommendations to increase the yield of fecal PCR can
be found at www.JodyGookin.com.

Management
Treatment of T. foetus infection in cats is problematic as fenbendazole and metronidazole, as well as many other drugs,
are ineffective. In a recent study, ronidazole (30 mg/kg PO
q24h for 2 weeks) was effective at resolving clinical signs
in 23 of 27 cats, with most cats becoming PCR negative.
Only three cats developed side-effects consisting mostly of
lethargy, vomiting, and lack of appetite that resolved after
discontinuation of the drug. Ronidazole neurotoxicity has
been reported within 3–9 days after initiation of treatment
and resolved after discontinuation of the drug. Therefore,
ronidazole should be administered only after a definitive
diagnosis has been made and only at the dosage listed
above. Natural resistance of T. foetus to ronidazole has been
recently demonstrated in two cats that were refractory to
treatment. Ronidazole is not approved for use in cats, and
must be compounded in capsules.

Prognosis
Spontaneous resolution of T. foetus infection usually
occurs within 2 years of onset. However, many cats may
remain silent carriers and be able to infect other cats.

K22463_C008.indd 318

In a recent study, 56% of 70 dogs with chronic diarrhea
responded to an elimination trial with a novel protein
diet (see Figure 8.86). Of those 39 diet-responsive dogs,
27 (69%) exclusively showed large bowel diarrhea while
nine (23%) had mixed large and small bowel signs.
Similarly, in another study, 27 (49%) of 55 cats with
chronic intestinal disease were diet responsive, while 16
(29%) were diagnosed as food sensitive. Two-thirds of the
feline group had abnormal findings on colonic or rectal
histopathology.
Based on these data, an elimination trial with hydrolyzed peptide or novel protein diets chosen on the basis of
the animal’s dietary history should be initiated in all dogs
with mild to moderate chronic idiopathic colitis. Clinical
signs generally abate within 10–14 days of treatment.

inflammatory bowel disease
Etiology/pathophysiology
The etiology and pathophysiology of IBD are described in
Part 4 (Diseases of the small intestine, Chronic enteropathy). While it appears that IBD most often affects the
small intestine or both small and large intestine concurrently (especially in cats), colonic IBD is a recognized
disease. Synonyms include lymphoplasmacytic colitis,
eosinophilic colitis.

Differential diagnosis
Whipworms, diet-responsive colitis, possibly colorectal
neoplasia (see below). In cats with compatible signalment
and history, T. foetus infection.

Diagnosis
The diagnostic approach must be comprehensive in
order to rule out all other known causes of colitis (see
Figure 2.6.9). While a treatment trial with sulfasalazine
or olsalazine may be appropriate in dogs with suspect
colonic IBD, colonoscopy with collection and histologic
evaluation of mucosal biopsies is recommended prior
to initiating immunosuppressive treatment. This will
confirm the presence and assess the severity of colonic
inflammation (Figures 8.103, 8.104) and rule out other

25/04/16 10:34 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

8.103

319

diseases such as granulomatous colitis (see below) or neoplasia (e.g. lymphoma, especially in cats). Colonoscopy
requires appropriate preparation with prolonged fasting
(24–48 hours), administration of electrolyte solutions with
osmotic laxative effects, and possibly enemas. Rigid proctoscopy can be performed in sedated dogs; however, a full
examination of the rectum, colon, and cecum is only possible using flexible endoscopes under general anesthesia.

Management

Figure 8.103 Colonoscopy view of a dog with chronic large
bowel diarrhea. The inability to see submucosal vessels
indicates thickening of the mucosa. The mucosal surface is
irregular with a cobblestone pattern. The histopathologic
diagnosis was severe lymphoplasmacytic colitis. (Courtesy
R. Husnik)

8.104

In dogs with suspect colonic IBD, an anti-inflammatory
treatment trial with sulfasalazine may be attempted
(10–30 mg/kg [maximum 1 gram total dose] PO q8h for
4–6 weeks). Sulfasalazine liberates 5-aminosalycilic acid in
the colon, and is widely used in the treatment of dogs with
colitis. After successful completion of the initial treatment
regimen, it is best to slowly decrease the dose in stages of
10–14 days. Monitoring tear production regularly during
treatment is essential as keratoconjunctivitis sicca is a common complication. Olsalazine (5–15 mg/kg q8–12h) may be
used in dogs that do not tolerate sulfasalazine. In addition,
dietary fiber supplementation is often helpful (see Box
8.10). In cats with colonic IBD and in dogs with confirmed
colonic IBD refractory to sulfasalazine or olsalazine, immunosuppressive prednisone should be initiated (Table 8.13).

Prognosis
Prognosis for IBD is generally better when only the colon
is affected. However, one retrospective study of dogs with
IBD did not find any association between localization
of disease and outcome. Nevertheless, clinical studies
demonstrated that a large number of dogs and cats with
colitis respond completely to dietary modification and/or,
for dogs only, to sulfasalazine treatment.

Granulomatous colitis
Definition/overview
Granulomatous colitis (GC) is also known as histiocytic
ulcerative colitis (HUC). It is a form of IBD that occurs
most frequently in young Boxer dogs or, infrequently, in
other breeds such as Mastiffs, Alaskan Malamutes, French
Bulldogs, and English Bulldogs.

Etiology
Figure 8.104 Colonoscopy picture of a 6-year-old cat with
chronic large bowel diarrhea and hematochezia. There are
numerous mucosal ulcerations (arrows). The histopathologic
diagnosis was severe, ulcerative lymphoplasmacytic colitis. The
cat improved when fed a novel protein diet and treated with
immunosuppressive doses of prednisolone.

K22463_C008.indd 319

Adhesive–invasive E. coli or adherent–invasive E. coli
adhere to and invade intestinal epithelial cells and have
been identified as the cause of GC. These E. coli are taken
up by endosomes and persist in the macrophages instead
of being cleared. A genetic predisposition for GC is suspected due to the preponderance of cases in young Boxer

25/04/16 10:34 pm

320

Diseases of specific organ systems

dogs. Preliminary results from genetic studies in Boxers
with GC and healthy controls point to a defective clearance of E. coli in macrophages.

Clinical presentation
The onset of disease generally occurs before 2 years of
age. Clinical signs include severe chronic large intestinal
inflammation with diarrhea, hematochezia, increased
frequency of defecation, tenesmus, and presence of excessive mucus in the feces. Although physical examination
findings are most frequently normal, weight loss and
inappetence can be seen in severe cases (Figure 8.105).

several dogs were reportedly disease-free after the drug
had been discontinued, there is increasing evidence that
GC may relapse after treatment. Recent reports suggest
that up to 43% of dogs with GC/HUC develop enrofloxacin resistance early in the disease process and may be
refractory to treatment if they are treated empirically.
Therefore, it is prudent to send colonic biopsies for culture

8.106

Diagnosis
Signalment, history, and clinical signs are usually very
suggestive. While it is tempting to initiate a treatment trial
in these dogs, a comprehensive diagnostic work up including endoscopic biopsies is the recommended approach.
Colonoscopy typically reveals sites of severe colonic
hemorrhage and ulcerations interspersed with stretches
of normal appearing mucosa. Histology may show severe
infiltration with neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and mast cells. Accumulation of large
macrophages staining strongly positive with PAS in
their cytoplasm is pathognomonic for GC (Figure 8.106).
Confirmation of the presence of E. coli using fluorescent
in situ hybridization (FiSH) analysis on formalin-fixed
­biopsies is now recommended as part of the detailed diagnostic work up of dogs with suspect HUC (Figure 8.107).

Figure 8.106 Photomicrograph from a colonic biopsy from a
Boxer with granulomatous colitis. There are numerous purplestained macrophages in the lamina propria (arrows point to
four such cells). It is thought that the PAS-positive intracellular
material represents accumulation of E. coli. PAS stain. C, colonic
crypts.

Management
Treatment of the disease consists of enrofloxacin at
10–20 mg/kg PO q24h for 4–6 weeks. Most affected dogs
respond within 10–14 days of initiating therapy. While

8.107

8.105

Figure 8.105 Eighteen-month-old Boxer with granulomatous
colitis and chronic intermittent large bowel diarrhea, episodes
of anorexia, and weight loss.

K22463_C008.indd 320

Figure 8.107 Photomicrograph of a colonic biopsy from a dog
with granulomatous colitis (fluorescent in situ hybridization or
FiSH). Long white arrows show some of the macrophages filled
with E. coli while short yellow arrows show examples of clusters
of E. coli within the mucosa. E. coli-Cy3 probe stains E. coli in
red–orange; DAPI stains nuclei in blue. (Courtesy K. Simpson)

25/04/16 10:34 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

321

8.108

and sensitivity before starting treatment, and tailor the
choice of antibiotics to the specific sensitivity profile of
the cultured E. coli.

Prognosis
The long-term prognosis is guarded to poor.

COLORECTAL OBSTRUCTION
Etiology/pathophysiology
Luminal colonic or rectal obstruction may result from a FB
or from the presence of hardened feces such as may be the
case in constipated or obstipated patients. Alternatively,
benign rectal strictures may occur in response to significant trauma of the rectal or distal colonic mucosa (e.g. FB,
anorectal surgery). Fibrosis and cellular proliferation
are responsible for narrowing of the lumen. Neoplastic
masses arising from the colonic wall may also cause an
obstruction to the passage of feces in the distal colon and
rectum (see below). They may cause malignant strictures.
Finally, space-occupying lesions occurring in neighboring
organs such as the prostate or sublumbar lymph nodes
may also compromise passage of feces through the distal
large bowel.

Figure 8.108 Severe tenesmus and dyschezia in a 4-year-old
Husky with constipation due to a rectal stricture. The anus was
scarred and extremely painful to palpation. The dog vocalized
loudly each time it tried to defecate. Eventually, defecation
ceased, presumably because it was too painful. Attempts at
surgical correction, including anal resection, were unsuccessful
and the dog was euthanized.

8.109

Clinical presentation
Dyschezia, tenesmus (Figure 8.108), passage of ribbonlike feces (Figure 8.109), and hematochezia are ­frequently
observed in association with partial or total colorectal
obstruction. Severe retention of feces may lead to systemic repercussions such as hyporexia, lethargy, and
vomiting.

Differential diagnosis
Primary colonic dysmotility, perineal hernia, anal sacculitis, and pseudocoprostasis may all cause dyschezia.

Diagnosis
In animals with a suggestive presentation, abdominal
palpation and digital rectal examination often allow confirmation of the presence of partial or total obstruction
of the distal large bowel. Sedation may be required for a
thorough rectal examination, particularly in animals who
are in pain. Radiographs and ultrasound of the abdomen
and pelvic canal may be useful to detect a radiopaque FB
and/or evaluate the severity of fecal retention and examine the surrounding structures. Endoscopic evaluation
can be performed using a rigid proctoscope or a flexible
endoscope. This allows visualization of the rectum and
distal colon and collection of mucosal biopsies if a neoplastic process is suspected.

K22463_C008.indd 321

Figure 8.109 This 13-year-old Dachshund was presented
with the complaint of tenesmus and ‘narrow stools’. The
dog strained hard to defecate and passed pencil thin feces.
Rectal examination revealed a stricture. Biopsy revealed scar
tissue and the dog responded well to balloon dilation and
sulfasalazine.

Management
Most FBs can be dislodged using repeated warm water
enemas with added water-soluble gel. Digital dilation of
mild rectal strictures may be successful, although several
procedures at intervals of 1 week are generally required.
Balloon dilation usually has a higher success rate. In
severe cases, or cases refractory to dilatory procedures,

25/04/16 10:34 pm

322

Diseases of specific organ systems

8.110

surgical removal is required (rectal pull-through if
­possible or other procedure). The treatment of obstructive neoplasia relies on surgical excision if feasible (see
below).

Prognosis
FB, benign polyp – good to excellent. Stricture, other
­neoplasia – guarded to poor. Anorectal surgery may lead
to fecal incontinence or recurrence of stricture.

FUNCTIONAL LARGE BOWEL DISORDERS
CHRONIC IDIOPATHIC LARGE BOWEL
DIARRHEA
Definition/overview
Chronic idiopathic large bowel diarrhea (CILBD) affects
dogs and is characterized by recurrent large bowel diarrhea in the absence of histopathologic evidence of inflammation. It appears to be comparable to irritable bowel
syndrome (IBS), a disease that is relatively common in
people. One form of IBS is associated with diarrhea.

Etiology/pathophysiology
The etiology of CILBD is unknown. In people, IBS is associated with visceral hypersensitivity and patients have
enhanced perception of visceral events such as contractions and gas throughout their GI tract. Stress, diet, and
intestinal and colonic microbiota are all thought to play
a role in the pathogenesis. Approximately 40% of dogs
with CILBD have abnormal personality traits and/or
are exposed to environmental stress factors. Associated
behavioral issues may include separation anxiety, submissive urination, noise sensitivity, aggression, or nervous, high-strung dogs. Environmental factors may range
from presence of visitors in the household and construction in the house to traveling and moving.

Clinical presentation

Figure 8.110 Feces from a 13-year-old mixed-breed dog
with chronic idiopathic large bowel diarrhea. This dog had
intermittent large bowel diarrhea only when the home
environment was disturbed. Colonoscopy and mucosal
biopsy were normal. The dog responded well to tranquilizers,
anticholinergics, and a high-fiber diet.

Diagnosis
CILBD is a diagnosis by exclusion, and all other causes
of chronic-intermittent large bowel diarrhea must be
ruled out (see Figure 2.6.9). Diagnostic criteria for CILBD
include chronic or chronic-recurring large bowel diarrhea
of at least 4 weeks’ duration, absence of or only minimal
abnormal findings on physical examination and blood
work, no other identifiable cause of diarrhea, and lack
(or only minimal) changes observed during colonoscopy.
Finally, histopathologic evaluation of the colonic mucosa
must be unremarkable.

Management
Between 63% and 96% of dogs with CILBD respond to fiber
supplementation alone (Box 8.10). In fiber-refractory
dogs, a full behavioral assessment should be performed
and behavior-modifying drugs prescribed as appropriate.
In one study, approximately 60% of dogs requiring drug
treatment responded, while 40% did not.

Dogs of all ages may be affected (median 6 years old)
and exhibit chronic intermittent large bowel diarrhea.
Excessive mucus in the feces (Figure 8.110), hematochezia, increased number of daily defecations, and/or
tenesmus are common. Appetite may be decreased during
diarrheic episodes and abdominal pain may be present.
Vomiting may occur as well.

Prognosis

Differential diagnosis

Constipation is characterized by infrequent or difficult
evacuation of feces. Obstipation is the result of recurrent,
intractable constipation. Constipation and obstipation
may culminate in the syndrome of megacolon. In the cat

Whipworm infestation, diet-responsive colitis, colonic
IBD, granulomatous colitis (in Boxer dogs and Bulldogs),
colonic neoplasia.

K22463_C008.indd 322

Prognosis is good considering the high response rate to
fiber supplementation.

CONSTIPATION
Definition/overview

25/04/16 10:34 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

Box 8.10 Fiber supplementation in dogs with colitis and
chronic idiopathic large bowel diarrhea.
Overall, dietary fibers enhance the structure and function
of the intestinal epithelium, and also have beneficial
effects on colonic motility. As a trade-off, they may have a
negative impact on nutrient digestibility depending on the
specific fiber type. Soluble fibers are fermented to shortchain fatty acids (SCFAs) by the colonic flora. SCFAs are an
essential source of energy for colonic epithelial cells.
•• Psyllium is a soluble fiber derived from the seed of
Plantago ovata. It has great water holding capacities and
forms gels in water, two properties that can contribute to
improvement of fecal consistency. Psyllium was very efficient when added to a highly digestible diet in the treatment of chronic idiopathic colitis. The initial daily dosage
is 0.5 tablespoon (T) for toy breeds, 1 T for small dogs,
2 T for medium dogs, and 3 T for large dogs. The fiber
supplement should be administered with each meal, and
the dose adapted to effect. Psyllium is included as an
ingredient in a few commercial prescription diets.
•• Canned pumpkin is another source of soluble fiber. It is
administered with an initial dosage comparable to that
of psyllium, and the dose is adapted to effect.
Other sources of SCFAs include fructooligosaccharides and
beet pulp, which are included in some high-quality diets.

constipation is a relatively frequent problem while obstipation and megacolon are less common. Constipation and
associated problems occur less frequently in the dog.

Etiology
Primary constipation is due to abnormal colonic motility.
Neuromuscular dysfunction may occur in animals with
lumbosacral disease or in cats with idiopathic megacolon.
Dehydration, hypokalemia, and hypocalcemia may all
negatively impact colonic motility. Inactivity and obesity
may also be a cause of prolonged large bowel transit time.
Furthermore, use of opiates and anticholinergics may
also lead to constipation.
Secondary constipation is more common and is associated with processes that impair the transit and evacuation of colonic content, such as mechanical obstruction
of the colon or rectum. Obstructions can be intraluminal
(e.g. fecal impaction, FB, stricture), intramural (neoplasia), or extramural (e.g. narrowing of the pelvic canal,
space-occupying lesions impinging on the descending
colon or rectum).

Clinical presentation
Typical clinical signs include reduced, absent, or painful
defecation, which may be progressive. Other clinical signs
associated with a primary underlying disease might

K22463_C008.indd 323

323

be present, such as those associated with hypothyroidism, which is more common in dogs. The onset of distal
bowel signs may be insidious and animals may be presented late when the problem is severe. Dyschezia may
be observed (Figure 8.108). Chronic constipation/obstipation may have systemic repercussions such as anorexia,
lethargy, weight loss, and vomiting.

Differential diagnosis
Diseases of the anorectum such as perineal hernia
and anal sacculitis may cause painful defecation.
Pseudocoprostasis or constipation can be caused by
matted hair around the anus, which occasionally occurs
in dogs and cats with long hair. Importantly, some cat
owners may not be able to differentiate stranguria and
dyschezia, and lower urinary tract diseases should
always be ruled out.

Diagnosis
A detailed physical examination is required. This may
reveal varying degrees of dehydration, weight loss, and
abdominal pain. Rectal palpation should be performed
and may reveal pelvic canal abnormalities, a rectal FB, a
stricture, or presence of a perineal hernia.
A thorough screening of animals presented with recurrent constipation is recommended to identify obstructions and underlying diseases and assess the systemic
repercussions of the problem. A minimal database consisting of CBC, biochemistry panel, and urinalysis should
be obtained in all cats presented for constipation to rule
out metabolic causes and underlying chronic diseases
such as chronic kidney disease. Abdominal radiographs
help characterize the severity of colonic impaction
(Figures 8.111, 8.112) and identify predisposing factors
such as intraluminal radiopaque foreign material, intraluminal or extraluminal mass lesions, pelvic fractures,
and spinal abnormalities. Extraluminal mass lesions
may be further evaluated by abdominal ultrasonography
and guided biopsy, whereas intraluminal mass lesions
are best evaluated by endoscopy.

Management
All identified underlying problems should be treated. If
the cause of the obstruction can be addressed in a timely
manner, colonic function may be preserved. However,
prolonged obstruction is ultimately associated with loss
of colonic contractility.
The different methods for treatment of idiopathic,
nonobstructive constipation include administration of
oral laxatives, enemas (Table 8.15), and prokinetic agents
such as cisapride (Table 8.9).

25/04/16 10:34 pm

324

Diseases of specific organ systems

8.111

8.112

In cats with chronic recurrent idiopathic constipation,
a stepwise approach has proven useful. Mild to moderate constipation (e.g. first occurrence, recurrence after
a long interval with normal defecation) is best treated
with an initial enema followed by treatment with laxatives. Maintaining these cats on a psyllium-enriched diet
or continuing daily administration of laxatives is recommended. Addition of prokinetics is necessary when
management with diet and laxatives fails. Early use of
cisapride is likely to prevent the progression of constipation to obstipation and dilated megacolon in these cats.
However, some cases become refractory to conservative
treatment and slowly progress to obstipation and dilated
megacolon.
When treating a constipated cat, enemas should be
injected slowly, as rapid administration may cause reflex
vomiting and rapid and excessive efflux of the liquid,
and may also increase the risk of colonic perforation. If
several enemas fail to induce defecation, ­nasoesophageal
­administration of PEG 3350 is a ­relatively ­noninvasive
method with an excellent s­uccess rate (Box 8.11,
Figure 8.113). This technique has significantly decreased
the number of cases that need to undergo manual
extraction of feces, a technique used when all other options
have failed. It is best performed on an ­anesthetized cat
with careful transabdominal colonic massage and simultaneous rectal administration of a combination of warm
water or physiologic saline with water-soluble lubricants to break down the impacted feces. Some authors
­recommend administering a low dose of metronidazole

Box 8.11 Conservative treatment of moderate to severe
colonic impaction on cats.

Figures 8.111, 8.112 Ten-year-old female spayed Domestic
Shorthair cat. (8.111) Right lateral abdominal radiograph.
There is severe dilation of the entire colon from the cecum to
the rectum with large amounts of radiopaque fecal material.
The cat is in poor body condition. Radiographic diagnosis is
megacolon. A urinary catheter is present. (8.112) Ventrodorsal
abdominal radiograph. The severely dilated and impacted colon
is displaced to the right. (Courtesy L. Gaschen)

K22463_C008.indd 324

Polyethylene glycol (PEG) 3350 is an osmotic laxative
that has been shown to be safe and palatable in cats. PEG
3350 can be administered to constipated or obstipated
cats through a nasoesophageal tube as a CRI at a rate of
between 6 and 10 ml/kg/hour. In a recent study, the mean
total dose required was 80 ml/kg (range 40–156), and
defecation occurred on average 8 hours after initiation of
treatment (range 5–24). The technique has ­considerably
decreased the need for enemas in feline practice
(Figure 8.113).
Sources: Carr AP, Gaunt MC (2010) Constipation resolution
with administration of polyethylene-glycol solution in cats.
J Vet Intern Med 24:723 (abstract).
Little S (2014) Personal communication.

25/04/16 10:34 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

8.113

325

8.114

Figure 8.114 Young mixed-breed dog with rectal prolapse.
Sugar has been applied to the mucosa to decrease the swelling.

Etiology

Figure 8.113 Constipated cat receiving PEG 3350 as a constant
rate infusion via a nasoesophageal tube. (Courtesy S. Little)

Prolapse occurs secondary to tenesmus associated with
disorders of the colon, anorectum, or urogenital tract.
Prevalence appears to be higher in young animals.
Predisposing factors include GI parasitism, typhlitis, colitis, proctitis, colorectal neoplasia, rectal FBs, p
­ erineal hernia, diseases of the urinary bladder, prostatic d
­ isorders,
and dystocia.

Clinical presentation
(7.5–15 mg/kg PO q12h) in order to limit the risk of bacterial translocation during or after the procedure.
A surgical approach is the last option for severe cases
with obstipation or megacolon that does not respond to
conservative treatment options. Different techniques for
colectomy have been successful.

Prognosis

Anal prolapse is characterized by the presence of red,
­swollen mucosa protruding from the anus, particularly
after defecation. In animals with a rectal prolapse, there is
an often round or cylindrical mass protruding from
the anus (Figure 8.114). The everted rectal mucosa and
other wall layers can become ischemic and damaged and
necrotic after prolonged exposure.

Many cats have one or two episodes of constipation without further recurrence, although others may progress to
complete colonic failure. When conservative management
has failed, colectomy is usually associated with a favorable prognosis, although mild to moderate d
­ iarrhea may
persist for 4–6 weeks postoperatively in some cases.

Diagnosis

RECTAL PROLAPSE

Management

Definition/overview
Prolapse can be partial with protrusion of anal mucosa
only (anal prolapse) or complete with protrusion of all
layers of the rectum (rectal prolapse).

K22463_C008.indd 325

A thorough physical examination is necessary to screen
for the underlying diseases predisposing to prolapse
listed above. If indicated, additional tests, such as fecal
parasitologic examination, blood analyses, and abdominal imaging, should be performed.

Reduction under sedation is easiest in animals with
anal prolapse using saline and water-soluble lubricant
gel. When a significant amount of mucosa is exposed or
in rectal prolapse, 50% dextrose can be applied to the
mucosa to reduce edema prior to careful r­ epositioning.
Corticosteroid cream can also be used to decrease

25/04/16 10:34 pm

326

Diseases of specific organ systems

inflammation and straining. A purse-string suture is
­
applied around the anus to narrow the anal orifice while
allowing soft feces to pass through, and kept in place for
3–5 days. The animal should be fed a low residue diet;
using lactulose (Table 8.15) to effect may helpful. If the
prolapsed rectal mucosa is traumatized or necrotic,
surgical resection is required. Underlying conditions
­
must be addressed to prevent recurrence. Colopexy may
be required in animals experiencing recurrent episodes
in spite of appropriate treatment.

stromal tumors such as leiomyosarcoma. Local tumor
invasion appears to be slow, and metastasis to distant
sites is uncommon.
In cats, adenocarcinoma and lymphoma are the two
most frequent types of colorectal neoplasia, f­ollowed by
mast cell tumors. Sites of predilection are the descending
colon and ileocolic junction. Malignant feline colorectal
tumors have a high rate of metastasis. Alimentary lymphoma often involves both the small and large intestines.

Prognosis
Generally good if the mucosa is viable and the prolapse
can be reduced. Guarded to poor if resection is required
because of the risk of stricture.

Colorectal neoplasms may cause mechanical obstruction. Colonic dysfunction with abnormal motility and
decreased water reabsorption capacity (with subsequent
diarrhea) may also occur.

COLORECTAL NEOPLASIA

Clinical presentation

Etiology
In dogs, the prevalence of colorectal neoplasia is higher
than that of gastric and small intestinal tumors. The
sites of predilection are the descending colon and rectum. Adenomas and polyps are relatively common
(Figure 8.115), and in-situ progression to carcinoma has
been documented. The most common type of malignant
neoplasia is adenocarcinoma, followed by lymphoma and

Pathophysiology

In dogs, common clinical signs include ­
hematochezia,
mucoid feces, and dyschezia, with or without concurrent diarrhea. Dyschezia may be associated with passage of feces of a smaller than usual diameter (see
Figure 8.109). Systemic neoplasia such as lymphoma may
be associated with signs suggesting involvement of other
organs, ­hyporexia, and weight loss. In cats, vomiting,
diarrhea, and weight loss are common with or without
clinical signs of large bowel disease.

Table 8.15 Therapeutic options for conservative management of constipation in cats.
Laxatives (administer in
well-hydrated cats only)

Bulk-forming (add to moist
cat food). More useful in mild
cases

Psyllium (1–4 teaspoons per meal); also available incorporated
in a proprietary dry extruded diet (Royal Canin Intestinal Fibre
Response®)
Wheat bran (1–2 tablespoons per meal)

Emollient

Dioctyl sodium succinate (10–15 ml/cat PO)

Lubricant

Mineral oil (10–15 ml/cat PO); administer with caution due to risk
of aspiration
White petrolatum (1–5 ml/cat PO)

Osmotic

Lactulose (0.5 ml/kg q8–12h PO)
PEG 3350 (Colyte®) 1.9 g/cat; dose can be doubled if no results
are seen after 48 hours. (See Box 8.11 for CRI instructions)

Removal of feces

Stimulant

Bisacodyl (5 mg q24h PO)

Enemas

Warm water (5–10 ml/kg)
Dioctyl sodium succinate or DSS (5–10 ml/cat)
Mineral oil (5–10 ml/cat)
Lactulose (5–10 ml/cat)

Manual extraction

K22463_C008.indd 326

Under anesthesia

25/04/16 10:34 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

Differential diagnosis
Causes of chronic colitis such as IBD, GC, heavy whipworm
infestation in dogs, IBD in cats. Also distal colonic or rectal FB or stricture.

Diagnosis
In dogs, rectal palpation can detect up to 80% of rectal
tumors. In cats, more than half of colonic masses can be
palpated abdominally. Survey radiographs may show an
accumulation of feces orad to the neoplasm. Mural masses
can be visualized using abdominal ultrasound, and surrounding lymph nodes can also be evaluated. Cytologic
evaluation of ultrasound-guided fine needle aspirates
can be useful, particularly for diagnosis of lymphoma.
However, the diagnosis of most other tumors requires histopathology from a biopsy collected during colonoscopy.
Endoscopy also allows a good evaluation of the severity
and extent of the tumor (Figures 8.115, 8.116). Thoracic
radiographs and abdominal ultrasound are used to stage
the tumor, looking for pulmonary masses and abnormal
abdominal lymph nodes.

327

recommended chemotherapy protocols are best found in
recent oncology texts.

Prognosis
Surgical excision is generally curative for benign tumors.
While the rectal pull-through procedure has few complications, secondary infections may occur after celiotomy
and resection of large bowel masses.
Canine carcinomas have been associated with a
median survival of 32 months after removal in pedunculated tumors, 12 months for sessile tumors, and less
than 2 months for annular tumors. The median survival
time for leiomyosarcoma is 9–22 months after resection.
Even though feline carcinomas benefit from an aggressive approach (subtotal colectomy), the median survival
is only 4–5 months. The approach to alimentary lymphomas in cats is discussed in more detail in Part 4: Diseases
of the small intestine.

Part 6: Diseases of the anus and
perineum
FECAL INCONTINENCE

Management
Rectal tumors are usually amenable to surgical resection
using the rectal pull-through technique. Masses located
in the cecum and colon require standard celiotomy for
resection. The benefit of chemotherapy has not been
established except for alimentary lymphoma. Currently
8.115

Definition/overview
Fecal incontinence is a rare disease that is characterized
by involuntary loss of feces. Anal sphincter incontinence
may be neurogenic (due to lesions damaging the innervation of the anal sphincter) or primary (in association with
direct damage to the sphincter). Reservoir incontinence is
uncommon and has been reported with loss of fecal storage capacity after colectomy.

8.116

Figure 8.115 Colonoscopic view of an adenoma located in the
distal colon of a dog. The parietal mass is pedunculated and
could be removed with an electrocautery snare passed through
the biopsy channel of the endoscope. (Courtesy R. Husnik)

K22463_C008.indd 327

Figure 8.116 Endoscopic view of a dog with a severely
abnormal rectal and colonic wall. The histopathologic diagnosis
was adenocarcinoma. (Courtesy R. Husnik)

25/04/16 10:34 pm

328

Diseases of specific organ systems

Etiology
Causes of non-neurogenic incontinence include IBD, colitis, colonic, rectal or anal/perianal neoplasia, anorectal trauma or surgery, and perianal fistula. Neurogenic
incontinence is associated with sacral spinal cord disorders or peripheral nerve diseases.

on the ground. If the perineal area is swollen and painful, the animal may not want to sit. Other frequently
­associated signs include dyschezia, tenesmus, or even
reluctance to defecate. A detailed examination of the
perineal area, including rectal palpation, may reveal
­
swelling and pain to the touch.

Clinical presentation

Differential diagnosis

Affected animals are unable to control defecation,
with involuntary elimination of feces, and ­
sometimes
continuous fecal dribbling. Concurrent urinary
­
­incontinence may be present in animals with neurogenic
fecal incontinence. Rectal palpation reveals significantly
decreased anal tone. A thorough neurologic examination
should be performed to detect other neurologic deficits.

Anal furunculosis, perianal or anal tumors, and bite
wounds (especially in cats).

Diagnosis
History and physical examination are usually sufficient.
A search for neurologic lesions and their precise location
may require cross-sectional imaging.

Management
Mild fecal incontinence may respond to opiates such as
loperamide (0.1 mg/kg PO q8h). These drugs increase the
tone of the internal sphincter, but are without effect on
the external sphincter. Moderate to severe cases are difficult to treat, regardless of their origin.

Prognosis
Guarded to poor in many cases.

DISEASES OF THE ANAL SACS
Definition/overview
Anal sac impaction, anal sacculitis, and abscess formation are common anal sac diseases that may occur in dogs
and occasionally in cats. Small breed dogs and some large
canine breeds (e.g. German Shepherd Dog) appear to be at
higher risk of developing anal sac diseases.

Etiology

Diagnosis
History and clinical signs are suggestive. Swelling may
be visible in the 4 and 8 o’clock positions ventral to the
anus. Rectal palpation confirms the presence of swollen
anal sacs, which are often painful. With impaction, pasty
thick and malodorous material can be expressed from the
swollen sacs. If the expressed material is bloody and/or
purulent, anal sacculitis is likely and can be confirmed
cytologically by the presence of large amounts of neutrophils with intracellular bacteria. Abscesses often involve
the surrounding tissues, and cytology of a fine needle
aspirate is diagnostic.

Management
Anal sac impaction is treated with gentle expression of
the swollen anal sacs. If digital massage and expression
are not successful, flushing the anal sacs with saline is
recommended. Instillation of an antibiotic and steroid
ointment into the empty sacs is generally recommended.
In animals with infected sacs, treatment also consists
of emptying and flushing the sacs and instillation of an
antibiotic ointment. However, this generally requires
sedation or light anesthesia. Systemic antibiotic treatment with a broad-spectrum antibiotic for 10–14 days is
usually recommended. Topical treatment with hot compresses s­ everal times daily may help reduce ­swelling and
pain. Abscesses should be lanced, flushed, and treated
with systemic antibiotics. Anal sacculectomy is a last
resort option for recurring cases.

The exact cause of anal sac disorders is unknown.
Abnormal anal sac emptying may occur with decreased
fecal consistency, obesity, and inactivity, or in association
with painful perianal processes such as anal furunculosis. Anal sac impaction increases the risk of infection and/
or abscessation.

Prognosis

Clinical presentation

Anal sac tumors are uncommon and very often ­malignant
neoplasms that occur in dogs. They may metastasize to regional lymph nodes and invade surrounding
tissues.

Anal sac disease commonly causes anal or perianal pruritus and pain, with excessive licking and/or biting of
the area, tail chasing, scooting, and rubbing the anus

K22463_C008.indd 328

Usually very good. Fecal incontinence is a possible
­complication of anal sacculectomy.

ANAL SAC TUMORS
Definition/overview

25/04/16 10:34 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

329

8.117

Etiology/pathophysiology
The etiology is unknown. Between 50% and 90% of
dogs with anal sac adenocarcinomas are hypercalcemic due to production of parathyroid hormone-related
peptide by cancerous cells. This malignancy-associated
­hypercalcemia may ultimately lead to irreversible kidney
injury.

Clinical presentation
Anal sac tumors most commonly affect older dogs,
with a predilection for females. Dyschezia and perianal swelling may be observed. Up to 40% of dogs may
only show clinical signs associated with hypercalcemia of m
­ alignancy: ­polyuria, polydipsia, vomiting, and
­constipation. A ­thorough rectal examination is essential to ­identify nodules ­associated with the anal sacs.
Metastasis to ­sublumbar lymph nodes is very common
at the time of ­diagnosis, and liver and lungs may be
affected as well.

Differential diagnosis
Other perianal tumors, perineal hernia, rectal FB, or stricture. Other causes of hypercalcemia, such as hyperparathyroidism, lymphoma, and other tumors, should also be
considered.

Diagnosis
History and physical examination are suggestive. If a
mass is present, cytologic evaluation of a fine needle
aspirate may be diagnostic. Radiographs and ultrasonography are useful to evaluate the sublumbar area, liver,
and lungs for metastasis (Figure 8.117). Cross-sectional
imaging may also be helpful in complicated cases. A CBC,
serum chemistry profile, and urinalysis are essential to
detect the presence of hypercalcemia (associated with
hypophosphatemia) and possible secondary kidney
damage.

Management
Wide surgical excision of the primary tumor and regional
lymph node. The benefits of chemotherapy and/or radiation treatment have not been clearly established.
Hypercalcemia may need to be addressed prior to surgery in order to avoid additional end organ damage (see
Chapter 11: Endocrine disorders).

Prognosis
Poor to fair, with a 40% 1-year survival. Negative prognostic factors include presence of lymph node or distant
metastases and tumor size.

K22463_C008.indd 329

Figure 8.117 Radiograph of the caudal abdomen of a
10 year-old male Akita Inu. The dog was presented with severe
hypercalcemia and dyschezia. While the primary anal sac tumor
was a few millimeters in diameter, the sublumbar lymph
node (LN) was severely enlarged (arrows). Note the ventrally
displaced colon (asterisks), urinary bladder (UB), and prostate
(P). A metallic plate used to repair a pelvic fracture several years
prior to presentation is visible on the ileum.

ANAL FURUNCULOSIS/PERIANAL FISTULAE
Definition/overview
Anal furunculosis is a chronic and painful disease of the
canine anorectum that seems to preferentially affect
middle aged to old German Shepherd Dogs and German
Shepherd Dog mixed breeds, although dogs from other
breeds may be also affected. The condition is characterized by inflammation, ulceration, and sinus tracts.

Etiology
The etiology is unknown, but is likely multifactorial.

Pathophysiology
The inflammatory process is chronic and consists of a
mononuclear to granulomatous infiltrate. It may involve
the anal sacs, their excretory ducts, the anal sphincter, and
the circumanal glands. Immune dysregulation with aberrant cell-mediated immune response and excessive local
production of matrix metalloproteinases has been reported
in dogs with anal furunculosis. The lower carriage of the

25/04/16 10:34 pm

330

Diseases of specific organ systems

tail in affected dogs may provide the necessary environment for worsening inflammation and infection.

Anal sac abscessation, perianal tumor, bite wound, or
other traumatic injury.

of ketoconazole, an inhibitor of cytochrome P450
enzymes, to increase the half-life of cyclosporine is not
­recommended because combination therapy results in
unpredictable and often subtherapeutic cyclosporine
levels. Immunosuppressive doses of prednisone (at
least 2 mg/kg PO q24h) only help in one-third of cases.
The effect of other immunosuppressive drugs has not
been evaluated. Medical treatment followed by surgery
(excision of remaining tracts, anal sacculectomy) is
associated with a lower risk of recurrence. A significant
number of dogs with anal furunculosis have concurrent
adverse reaction to food, and feeding an elimination
novel-protein or hydrolyzed diet may contribute to
decreasing the recurrence rate.

Diagnosis

Prognosis

Thorough examination of the perianal area may be difficult without sedation. The perineum should be cleaned
to appreciate the extent of the disease process. The anus
and rectum should be evaluated in detail, as they may be
involved as well.

Overall guarded. Recurrence is common. Anal sphincter
incompetence and fecal incontinence are well known
complications of surgery.

Management

Definition/overview

Immunosuppression with cyclosporine (5 mg/kg PO
q12–24h for 1–3 months) is effective in 60–98% of
cases but can be costly in large dogs. Concurrent use

Perineal hernia results from weakness and breakdown of
the pelvic diaphragm, with deviation and herniation of
the rectum (and, possibly, the urinary bladder, prostate,
and small intestine) into the perineum. The pelvic diaphragm consists of the levator ani and coccygeus muscles
and the perineal fascia.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs include a painfully ulcerated perineal
region with perianal discharge (Figure 8.118) and associated tenesmus, dyschezia, hematochezia, and/or constipation. In severe cases, anorexia, weight loss, and
behavioral changes may be observed. Intensive perianal
licking may be an early sign.

Differential diagnosis

8.118

PERINEAL HERNIA

Etiology
The condition occurs in middle aged intact male dogs.
Predisposed breeds include Pekingese, Boston Terrier,
Welsh Corgi, Boxer, Poodle, Bouvier, and Old English
Sheepdog. It is occasionally seen in cats as a surgical complication of perineal urethrostomy or colectomy.

Pathophysiology
The exact pathophysiology is unknown, and the disease is most likely multifactorial. The existence of rectal abnormalities (dilation, diverticulum), androgens,
­gender-related anatomic differences, relaxin (a hormone
synthesized in the prostate), prostatic disease, and neurogenic atrophy have all been associated with perineal
hernia in dogs.

Clinical presentation

Figure 8.118 View of the cleaned and clipped perianal area of
an 8-year-old female spayed German Shepherd Dog with anal
furunculosis. Note several fistulous tracts oozing bloody or
purulent exudate. (Courtesy LSU SVM Dermatology Service)

K22463_C008.indd 330

Typical presenting signs include reducible perineal
swelling (Figure 8.119), tenesmus, dyschezia, and constipation. The disease can be unilateral (if so, the right side
is more commonly affected) or bilateral. Rectal examination reveals a defect in the pelvic diaphragm surrounding
the rectum. If the bladder is retroflexed, dogs may not be

25/04/16 10:34 pm

Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum)

able to void urine and develop postrenal azotemia with
associated signs such as vomiting, anorexia, and lethargy.

331

8.120

Differential diagnosis
Perineal tumor.

Diagnosis
History and clinical signs are usually sufficient. Survey
and contrast radiographs (Figures 8.120, 8.121) or ultrasonography (Figure 8.122) are necessary to confirm retroflexion of the urinary bladder or other organs. CBC,
serum chemistry, and urinalysis are useful to evaluate
kidney function.

Management
Medical management, consisting of maintaining a
soft fecal consistency with laxatives such as lactulose
(0.5 ml/kg PO q8–12h) or a bulk-forming agent such as
psyllium (Box 8.10), and occasional enemas, may be successful in the short term with mild cases. However, most
cases require surgical treatment. Herniorrhaphy using
the internal obturator transposition technique is usually
successful. (See surgery textbooks for further details.)

8.121

8.119
Figures 8.120, 8.121 Another dog with a perineal hernia.
(8.120) Caudal abdominal radiograph. A large soft tissue mass
representing the hernia can be seen in the perineum. The
urinary bladder is not visible in the caudal abdomen. (8.121)
Positive contrast retrograde urethrocystography. The bladder is
retroflexed in the perineal hernia. (Courtesy L. Gaschen)

8.122

Figure 8.119 Severe bilateral perineal hernia in a 10-year-old
intact male Rottweiler.

K22463_C008.indd 331

Figure 8.122 Ultrasound image of the dog in Figure 8.119.
The prostate and urinary bladder are retroflexed in the
retroperitoneal space. The balloon of a Foley catheter passed
into the bladder is visible. Orientation: left is cranial; right is
caudal.

25/04/16 10:34 pm

332

Diseases of specific organ systems

Surgical complications include seroma, wound infection,
fecal incontinence, and sciatic nerve paralysis.

Prognosis
Good if the hernia can be repaired early, guarded in dogs
with chronic perineal hernia. In the latter group, recurrence is frequent and repeat surgical intervention is often
challenging.

PERINEAL TUMORS
Definition/overview
The perianal region of dogs contains perianal (or circumanal) glands that are located in the dermis in a circular pattern around the anus. Perianal adenomas are the
most common perianal tumors, while perianal adenocarcinomas occur considerably less frequently.

Etiology
Perianal adenomas are sex hormone dependent and occur
mostly in middle aged to older males. Cocker Spaniels,
Beagles, Bulldogs, and Samoyeds may be predisposed.
Adenocarcinomas are not influenced by sex hormones
and occur in neutered or intact male and female dogs.

Clinical presentation
Adenomas are slow growing, single, multiple or diffuse
nonpainful masses located around the anus or on the
perineum, and occasionally also on the prepuce, scrotum,
and tailhead. Adenocarcinomas grow faster and may be
similar to adenomas, but may be more firm, adhere to
underlying tissues, and become ulcerated.

Diagnosis
Signalment, history, and physical examination are suggestive. Cytologic evaluation of a fine needle aspirate
reveals typical sebaceous cells that resemble hepatocytes.
However, cytology does not allow reliable differentiation
between adenoma and adenocarcinoma.

Management
Adenoma: castration and conservative surgical removal.
Adenocarcinoma: wide excision of the primary tumor and
affected lymph nodes. Postoperative radiation therapy
may be useful. Inoperable cancers may benefit from palliative radiation treatment and chemotherapy.

Prognosis
Adenoma: excellent, low risk of recurrence after excision
if the dog is neutered. Adenocarcinoma: removal at an
early stage (diameter less than 5 cm) is associated with
good survival.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (2010) (eds) Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 7th edn. Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis.
Little SE (2012) (ed) The Cat. Clinical Medicine and Management.
Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.
Nelson RW, Couto CG (2014) (eds) Small Animal Internal
Medicine, 5th edn. Sauders Elsevier, St. Louis.
Washabau RJ, Day MJ (2013) (eds) Canine and Feline
Gastroenterology. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.
Withrow SJ, Vail DM, Page RL (2013) (eds) Withrow and
MacEwen’s Small Animal Clinical Oncology, 5th edn.
Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.

Differential diagnosis
Differentiating adenoma from adenocarcinoma is challenging, but important, as more aggressive treatment is
required for the malignant perineal tumor. Detection of
metastases is strongly indicative of adenocarcinoma.

K22463_C008.indd 332

25/04/16 10:34 pm

333

Chapter 9
Liver disorders
Joseph Taboada

INTRODUCTION
Hepatology (the study of the liver and the diseases
that affect it) remains a particularly frustrating area
in small animal internal medicine because the liver is
involved in hundreds of metabolic processes and can be
involved with a variety of pathologic and pathophysiologic changes. Fortunately, the liver has a remarkable
functional reserve; in some cases as much as 70–80%
of the functional liver mass must be impaired before
signs of dysfunction become apparent and, under the
right circumstances, the liver is capable of regenerating ­significant functional capacity over relatively short
­periods of time.
Alterations in the normal metabolic processes result in
many of the clinical findings in animals with liver disease.
Some of these important metabolic processes include: normal metabolism of lipids, protein, carbohydrate, vitamins,
and minerals; bile acid synthesis and excretion; protein
production; detoxification and ­excretion of many endogenous and exogenous substances; production of urea from
ammonia; drug metabolism and excretion; managing
translocated bacteria and bacterial products, coagulation, and reticuloendothelial function. Abnormalities of
normal protein production and bilirubin metabolism can
be especially significant determinants of clinical signs.
Impaired albumin ­
synthesis may result in decreased
plasma oncotic pressure, therefore edema or ascites and
impaired synthesis of procoagulant clotting proteins and
anticoagulants may result in ­
bleeding or thrombosis.
Cholestasis may result in jaundice.
Despite the importance of the liver in normal metabolism, early diagnosis of liver disease is often impaired
by the nonspecific nature of the typical clinical signs
and by a paucity of findings at physical examination.
Typically, animals with liver disease present with
lethargy, anorexia, weight loss, and other nonspecific c­linical signs. Signs referable to the gastrointestinal (GI) tract such as vomiting and diarrhea are also
common. Vomiting is an important yet nonspecific

K22463_C009.indd 333

finding, especially in cats. Either large or small bowel
diarrhea may be noted, especially in dogs or in cats with
­concurrent i­ntestinal or pancreatic disease. Diarrhea is
a less common fi
­ nding than vomiting. Abdominal pain
may be noted in ­animals with acute liver diseases or in
patients with ­concurrent or associated pancreatitis or
peritonitis.
Neurologic manifestations of liver disease are c­ ommon
in animals with either congenital or acquired portosystemic shunts (PSSs) or acute fulminating hepatic failure.
The signs associated with hepatoencephalopathy are generally those of central nervous system (CNS) ­depression
or overt signs of cerebral and diencephalic dysfunction
(Figure 9.1). Depression, ­behavioral changes, ataxia, central blindness, circling, head p
­ ressing, ­pacing, ­panting,
stupor, coma, and seizures may be noted. Seizures
are most common in animals with PSSs, e­specially
following attempted surgical correction. Cats with
9.1

Figure 9.1 A terminally ill dog in an hepatic coma caused by
fulminating hepatic lipidosis. Gross pathology and histopathology
of this dog’s liver showed marked hepatic lipidosis.

23/04/16 1:10 pm

334

Diseases of specific organ systems

­hepatoencephalopathy tend to have signs that are more
difficult to ascribe to the CNS. Anorexia, CNS depression,
and ptyalism are often noted in cats with liver disease and
may not be attributed to the influence of ­hepatotoxins on
the CNS, thus leading to underutilization of a
­ ppropriate
medical therapy for ­
hepatoencephalopathy in this
species.
Cholestasis resulting in icterus is common in animals
with liver disease, but it may not be severe enough to
be noted at physical examination early in the disease
process. Posthepatic biliary disease, pancreatitis, and
hemolytic anemia are also important causes of icterus.
Animals with severe liver disease may not produce or
normally activate procoagulant clotting factors, resulting in overt bleeding tendencies. GI bleeding is common.
Nonspecific signs of anemia may be noted if bleeding
is low grade and chronic, or melena may be obvious if
­bleeding is severe. Ecchymotic hemorrhage may be apparent. Platelet membrane abnormalities associated with
changes in lipoprotein metabolism may result in thrombopathia or decrease platelet half-life and thus cause
­thrombocytopenia with resultant petechia. Changes in
anticoagulant protein ­production may result in thrombosis or ­thromboembolism. The disrupted balance between
bleeding and ­thrombosis in liver disease can be clinically
very confusing.
Unless the patient is jaundiced or exhibits overt signs
of encephalopathy or ascites, clinicopathologic abnormalities are frequently the first indicator of liver disease.
Increased transaminase activities or increased activities
of enzymes indicative of cholestasis are the earliest indicators of liver disease in most cases. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST) activities
are sensitive indicators of liver insult in both dogs and
cats, while increased alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and
gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) activities are indicative of cholestasis. Hypoalbuminemia may indicate
decreased hepatic function, as can decreased blood urea
nitrogen (BUN) and hypoglycemia. These biochemical
indicators are not specific for decreased hepatic function, so more specific tests such as fasting and postprandial bile acids or plasma ammonia concentrations are
often evaluated when hepatic dysfunction is suspected.
Unfortunately, biochemical recognition of primary
hepatic disease is complicated by the fact that disorders
that involve the liver secondarily (reactive hepatopathies), as well as certain drugs, can cause abnormal liver
test results. In addition to liver tests, radiology, ultrasonography, cross-sectional imaging, and cytologic and histologic examination of liver tissue are employed in the
evaluation of the hepatobiliary system.

K22463_C009.indd 334

FELINE HEPATIC LIPIDOSIS
Definition/overview
Feline hepatic lipidosis is a syndrome that can be either
a primary idiopathic condition or secondary to a variety
of common diseases of cats. Hepatic lipidosis is the most
common liver disease of the cat, accounting for approximately 50% of diagnoses. The disorder accounts for
approximately 10% of liver related deaths. Other names
include feline fatty liver syndrome, steatosis, and fatty
liver.

Etiology
A variety of factors have been proposed as potential etiologies, none of which has been confirmed. A multifactoral
pathogenesis leading to malnutrition is likely. The major
risk factor is obesity and a prolonged reduction of food
intake, but obesity is not universally present in affected
cats. Anorexia may be caused by concurrent disease,
dietary change, or decreased food intake. Environmental
stress is potentially an additional important risk factor. Changes in the intestinal microbiome may play an
important role.

Pathophysiology
The exact pathogenesis remains to be defined. Decreased
caloric intake causes a negative nitrogen balance. Fatty
acids are mobilized from tissue stores and transported to
the liver. Decreased protein metabolism and amino acid
availability means that there is insufficient a
­ poprotein
to facilitate removal of fatty acids and fat accumulates in
the ­hepatocytes. Histologically, >80% of hepatocytes will
be heavily vacuolated with triglyceride. This decreases
the ability of the cell to function and liver function slowly
decreases.

Clinical presentation
Most affected animals are 2 years old or older. Cats with
secondary hepatic lipidosis tend to be older than cats with
idiopathic hepatic lipidosis. There is no apparent breed or
gender predisposition, but older females seem to be more
at risk. Affected cats are commonly obese and/or have
experienced a stressful event of some type (e.g. a change
in environment or concurrent disease). This is followed
by anorexia and rapid weight loss or muscle wasting.
Anorexia persists and the cat is presented for veterinary
evaluation usually between 1 and 3 weeks after onset.
Jaundice develops in most cats and is usually evident on
presentation to a veterinarian.
At examination cats are depressed, dehydrated, and
icteric (Figure 9.2) and show varying degrees of muscle

23/04/16 1:10 pm

Liver disorders

9.2

335

9.4

Figure 9.4 Marked muscle wasting along the back of a cat with
hepatic lipidosis.
9.5

Figure 9.2 Jaundice in a cat with hepatic lipidosis.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

9.3

Figure 9.5 A Domestic Shorthair cat with hepatic encephalopathy
associated with hepatic lipidosis. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Differential diagnosis
Idiopathic hepatic lipidosis, secondary hepatic lipidosis,
pancreatitis, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), feline
infectious peritonitis (FIP), hepatic lymphoma, cholangitis, liver flukes, biliary neoplasia.

Figure 9.3 Marked subcutaneous fat pads in a cat with hepatic
lipidosis. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

wasting. However, fat pads remain intact, r­ eflecting the
cat’s inability to mobilize fat in this disease and
the marked muscle breakdown for g
­luconeogenesis
(Figures 9.3, 9.4). Hepatic encephalopathy (Figure 9.5)
may be related to severe hepatocellular dysfunction or to
a relative deficiency of arginine, to which the anorexic cat
is predisposed (cats cannot synthesize arginine and must
rely on dietary sources). Abdominal palpation may reveal
hepatomegaly that is smooth surfaced.

K22463_C009.indd 335

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on hepatic cytology or histologic examination of a liver biopsy specimen. Typical ­laboratory
findings are those of cholestasis; total bilirubin values
range from normal (5 µmol/l [0.3 mg/dl]) to 256.5 µmol/l
(15 mg/dl) or higher. There is usually a mild nonregenerative anemia.
Poikilocytosis is common and target cells may be noted.
Liver enzyme activities are increased; ALT is normal or
moderately increased (50–450 IU/l), AST is normal or moderately increased (50–450 IU/l), and ALP is occasionally
normal but usually moderately to markedly increased
(75–1,200 IU/l). Albumin and globulin concentrations are

23/04/16 1:10 pm

336

Diseases of specific organ systems

usually normal. Fasting serum bile acid concentrations
are above normal (0.75–5.6 µmol/l [0.3–2.3 µg/ml]) in most
cats, but it should be noted that measurement of serum
bile acids is considered redundant if hyperbilirubinemia
is present, as it is in most affected cats. Glucose may be
increased due to stress. Hypokalemia is often present.
Greater than 50% of cats will have prolongation of PIVKA
(proteins induced by vitamin K antagonism or absence),
prothrombin time (PT), or partial thromboplastin time
(PTT), but overt bleeding tendencies are rare. Of the
­commonly used coagulation screening tests, PIVKA is the
one most likely to detect an abnormality. Coagulopathies
associated with hepatic lipidosis are often responsive to
vitamin K1.
Abdominal radiographs may reveal hepatomegaly.
Ultrasonographic examination of the liver and surrounding structures allows other diseases in the differential
diagnosis, such as cholangitis and extrahepatic bile duct
obstruction, to be ruled out. The principal ultrasonographic feature of hepatic lipidosis is hyperechogenicity.
Tissue diagnosis can be made by aspiration cytology
in some patients, but in others it is achieved by fine
needle percutaneous biopsy (Figure 9.6), laparoscopy
(Figure 9.7), or by exploratory laparotomy. Specimens are
placed in buffered 10% formalin, in which they usually
float.

Management
The mainstay of therapy is complete nutritional support and treatment of known concurrent i­llness.
Protein should not be restricted unless severe signs
of hepatoencephalopathy are present and ­
cannot be
­controlled by other means. Adequate caloric support
(80–100 kcal/kg/day) is critical and can rarely be

accomplished without enteral support. Food is best
­
administered through an esophagostomy or gastrostomy tube. Nasoesophageal feeding can be used, but
the long-term nature of the enteral nutritional support
needed makes this a less than ideal delivery method.
Feeding tubes should be left in place until the cat is
eating on its own. This may take months in some cats.
Parenteral treatment with vitamin K1 (0.5–1.5 mg/kg
IM) should be administered approximately 12 hours
prior to biopsy. Fluids with potassium supplementation are important until an enteral feeding method is
established. Serum ­
phosphorus should be monitored
closely during the initial 48 hours after starting enteral
feeding. Re-feeding-induced hypophosphatemia is common and, if severe, may result in hemolysis or signs of
CNS dysfunction that might be confused with hepatoencephalopathy. Careful administration of parenteral
phosphate supplementation may be necessary during
this period. B vitamins have been r­ecommended in
the management of cats with hepatic lipidosis. Soluble
multi-B vitamin supplements have been recommended
as additives to fluids used in the ­initial management
of cats with hepatic lipidosis. Thiamine and cobalamin
have both been implicated in the potential pathogenesis. Serum cobalamin has been noted to be low in cats
with hepatic lipidosis, especially those with concurrent pancreatitis or IBD, and supplementation (1 mg
IM q1–4weeks) is recommended. Other supplements
that have been recommended include L-carnitine
(250 mg/day PO), vitamin E (10 mg/kg/day PO), and SAMe
9.7

9.6

Figure 9.6 Histologic appearance of the liver in feline hepatic
lipidosis. Note the empty hepatocytes, which contained fat
removed during the fixing process.

K22463_C009.indd 336

Figure 9.7 Laparoscopic view of the liver of a cat with hepatic
lipidosis. Note the fatty liver and distended gallbladder.

23/04/16 1:10 pm

Liver disorders

337

9.8

(20 mg/kg PO q12h). Efforts should be made to correct
any sources of psychological stress that may have triggered the initial anorexia.
The prognosis for cats with idiopathic hepatic lipidosis
treated with adequate nutritional support is good. From
75% to >90% of cats will respond completely to therapy.
Relapse is rare. If secondary hepatic lipidosis is present,
the prognosis is dependent on the underlying disease.
Less than 10% of cats with hepatic lipidosis will recover if
adequate nutritional support is not maintained.

FELINE INFLAMMATORY LIVER DISEASE
Definition/overview
Chlolangitis is a complex of related inflammatory
hepatobiliary disorders that accounts for approxi­
mately 25% of the liver diseases in cats. The WSAVA Liver
Standardization Group has proposed a nomenclature
­system that recognizes three distinct forms of cholangitis
in cats: neutrophilic, lymphocytic, and c­ holangitis associ­ eutrophilic
ated with liver flukes (Figures 9.8a–c). The n
form is subdivided into an acute ­
(neutrophilic infiltrate) and a chronic (mixed infiltrate) form. The term
cholangitis has been recommended in preference to
cholangiohepatitis.

a

Etiology
Inflammatory liver diseases are characterized by the
predominant inflammatory cell infiltrate seen histopathologically. The inflammation is usually seen in the
portal areas and can be characterized as suppurative
(neutrophilic) (Figure 9.9), nonsuppurative (lymphocytic–­
plasmacytic) (Figures 9.10–9.12), or biliary cirrhosis
(fibrosis). Cholangitis is the primary finding, with extension of the inflammation across the limiting plate into the
surrounding hepatic parenchyma and periportal necrosis
being common. Whether these ­classifications represent
different stages in the p
­ rogression of one disease, or are
separate etiologic entities, is not known, nor is the underlying etiology of inflammatory liver disease in cats.

b

Pathophysiology
Bacterial, allergic, and immune mechanisms have all
been speculated to be involved in the pathogenesis of
inflammatory liver disease in cats. Bacterial cholangitis from ascending infection from the duodenum may
either initiate the inflammatory process or perpetuate it
early in the disease course. Immune mechanisms probably also play a role, especially in lymphocytic cholangitis and chronic mixed cholangitis. Cats with cholangitis,
especially those with suppurative disease, may also have

K22463_C009.indd 337

c
Figures 9.8a–c Liver fluke. (a) Microscopic view of a liver fluke
(Platynosum concinum) ovum from a cat living in South Florida.
(b) Surgical view of liver fluke-induced chronic cholangitis in a cat
living in North Central Florida. (c) Histopathology section of liver
fluke residing in a bile duct causing inflammation and fibrosis.
Taken from the cat in 9.8b. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

23/04/16 1:10 pm

338

Diseases of specific organ systems

9.12

9.9

Figure 9.9 Postmortem view of the liver of a cat with
suppurative cholangitis and cholecystitis. The cystic duct was
obstructed by inspissated bile. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

9.10

Figure 9.12 High-power photomicrograph of lymphocytic–
plasmacytic cholangitis in a cat. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

concurrent cholecystitis, pancreatitis, and IBD. The relationship between these three inflammatory conditions is
not well characterized, but it has been speculated that
the underlying initiator of the inflammatory process
may affect the liver, the pancreas, and the small intestine concurrently. The term ‘triaditis’ has been coined
to describe those situations in which inflammation of
the liver, pancreas, and small intestine are seen to occur
concurrently.

Clinical presentation

Figure 9.10 Surgical exploratory on a cat with chronic
lymphocytic–plasmacytic hepatitis with telangiectasia.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

9.11

Figure 9.11 Photomicrograph of the specimen in Figure 9.10
showing marked periportal lymphocytic–plasmacytic infiltrates.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C009.indd 338

The clinical findings seen in cats with inflammatory liver
disease are similar to those seen with hepatic lipidosis
and other liver diseases. Vomiting, anorexia, lethargy,
and weight loss are typical. Fever is occasionally seen.
Diarrhea, while not usual, is more common than in cats
with hepatic lipidosis and may represent that subset of
cats with concurrent IBD. Affected cats are rarely obese.
A mild ascites may be present (Figure 9.13). Cats with
suppurative cholangitis are more likely to be severely
systemically ill when compared with cats with lymphocytic cholangitis. Cats of all ages can be affected. Males
predominate in populations of cats with suppurative
cholangitis compared with those with lymphocytic cholangitis. Suppurative cholangitis often has an acute course,
while disease characterized by lymphocytic–plasmacytic inflammation may be more chronic. In e­ valuating
liver enzymes, ALP tends not to be as elevated as in cats
with hepatic lipidosis, while ASDT, ALP, and GGT activities tend to be higher. About 50% of cats will have high
serum bilirubin concentrations. Neutrophil counts, transaminase activities, and total bilirubin concentrations
tend to be higher in cats with suppurative cholangitis
when c­ ompared with cats with lymphocytic cholangitis.

23/04/16 1:10 pm

Liver disorders

9.13

339

9.14

Figure 9.14 Low-power view of a trichrome-stained needle
biopsy specimen from the cat in Figure 9.13. There is marked
hepatic fibrosis (blue staining) in addition to inflammatory cells.
9.15

Figure 9.13 Mild abdominal distension caused by a sterile
inflammatory exudate in a cat with cholangitis.

However, all liver enzymes may be normal early in the
course of disease.

Differential diagnosis
As for hepatic lipidosis.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually dependent on histopathology, as
cytology is often normal or reveals nonspecific changes.
Biopsy for both histopathology and culture should be
performed if inflammatory liver disease is suspected. The
advent of readily available ultrasonography has resulted
in needle biopsy becoming the most popular method of
obtaining tissue for histopathology (Figures 9.14, 9.15).
Ultrasonography can also provide ­important information pertaining to co-existing cholecystitis. However,
the diagnostic accuracy of needle obtained biopsies has
been questioned. Laparoscopically or surgically obtained
‘wedge’ samples should be considered for histopathology and bacterial culture and sensitivity when feasible;

K22463_C009.indd 339

Figure 9.15 Histologic appearance of the liver in a 4-year-old
Persian cat with cholangitis. There is marked fibrosis (arrows)
and an infiltrate of plasma cells and lymphocytes (arrowheads).

the larger samples give the pathologist more tissue to
assess (Figure 9.16, biopsy comparison). Prior to biopsy,
coagulation parameters should be evaluated. As in cats
with hepatic lipidosis, PIVKA may be the most sensitive
indicator of potential bleeding tendencies. Vitamin K1
(0.5–1.5 mg/kg SC) given 12–24 hours prior to biopsy may
decrease the risk of bleeding. Culture of aspirated bile
may be a more sensitive indicator of bacterial infection
than culture of biopsy specimens.

Management
In addition to the supportive care and nutritional support important in the management of cats with hepatic
lipidosis, antibiotics effective against gram-negative
­
and/or anaerobic bacteria should be used when treating
cats with inflammatory liver disease. This is probably
most important when treating suppurative cholangitis.

23/04/16 1:10 pm

340

Diseases of specific organ systems

Metronidazole is effective against anaerobes and some
gram-negative aerobes and it has immune modulating
effects. Ampicillin, amoxicillin, amoxicillin–clavulanate,
and enrofloxacin are excreted in the bile and are also
good choices.
Immunosuppressive agents should be added to the
treatment regimen in cats with lymphocytic or mixed
inflammatory disease and in cats with suppurative disease that fail to respond to antibiotics alone. Prednisolone
(2–4 mg/kg/day initially then slowly tapered to 1 mg/kg
every other day) is used most commonly. Other immunosuppressives that may be used in cats responding poorly
to glucocorticoids include chlorambucil (approximately
1 mg for cats <3.2 kg, 2 mg for cats >3.2 kg, PO q48h) and
oral cyclosporine. Ursodeoxycholic acid (10–15 mg/kg PO
q24h) is a safe treatment alternative that can be used in
cats with suppurative or nonsuppurative disease. The
drug appears to have multiple actions including shifting
the bile acid pool to a less toxic hydrophilic population,
a choleretic effect, reducing expression of class 2 major
histocompatibility complex, and an anti-­inflammatory
effect. Bile duct patency is required before using
ursodeoxycholic acid. Since the drug is commercially
­
available in a 300 mg capsule size in the USA, accurate
dosing of ursodeoxycholic acid for a cat can be prepared
by a compounding pharmacist.
Antioxidants are important in the management of
liver diseases as oxidative damage appears to be an
important factor in perpetuation of inflammation and
initiation of fibrosis. Vitamin E (aqueous alpha tocopherol, 10–100 IU/kg/day) has been advocated for its antioxidant effects. SAMe (90–180 mg PO q24h) is a precursor
of glutathione. Glutathione is an important antioxidant
that has been shown to be reduced in dogs and cats with
liver disease. The nutraceutical SAMe may help replace
glutathione. It also may have hepatoprotective effects
9.16

Figure 9.16 Sub-gross views of liver biopsy slides. Laparotomy
liver wedge biopsy (left); laparoscopic liver wedge biopsy
(middle); ultrasound guided Tru-cut liver biopsy (right). All
stained with H&E stain (Courtesy J. Greene and I. Langohr)

K22463_C009.indd 340

in preventing programed cell death (apoptosis), which
occurs during inflammatory liver disease. Milk thistle extract (­silymarin) is a nutraceutical that is widely
used for its ­hepatoprotective effects. It may be of benefit as an antioxidant, as an antifibrotic agent, or as an
aid in hepatic regeneration. The recommended dose is
50–200 mg/kg PO q24h. Two products containing silybin
and vitamin E are marketed: Marin®, which is a combination of silybin and vitamin E plus zinc, and Marin® Plus,
which contains silybin, vitamin E, zinc, medium chain
­triglyceride oil, and curcumin. Silybin is one of the active
ingredients in milk thistle. Additionally, there is a ­product
(Denamarin®) that contains both silybin and SAMe.

CHRONIC INFLAMMATORY LIVER DISEASE
IN DOGS
Definition/overview
The dog suffers from a variety of chronic inflammatory
liver diseases (e.g. administration of primidone, phenytoin, and phenobarbital; abnormal copper metabolism in
the Bedlington Terrier, West Highland White Terrier, Skye
Terrier, Dalmatian, and Labrador Retriever; spontaneous
and experimentally induced infectious canine hepatitis),
often resulting in subsequent cirrhosis (Table 9.1). All
have similar clinical signs. In the dog, chronic hepatitis
(CH) (formerly chronic active hepatitis) has been associated with leptospirosis. A syndrome of CH has also been
recognized in the Dobermann, Dalmatian, and American
Cocker Spaniel. CH resulting in subsequent cirrhosis is
rare in cats.

Etiology
Chronic inflammatory liver diseases have overlapping
histologic appearances and are mostly of unknown etiology. Once started, the immune system, oxidative stress,
and stellate cell activation with subsequent fibrosis play
Table 9.1 Inflammatory disorders of the canine liver.
•• Chronic hepatitis: breed related (e.g. Dobermann, Cocker
Spaniel, Labrador Retriever)
•• Copper storage hepatopathy: Bedlington Terrier, West
Highland White Terrier
•• Chronic nonsuppurative hepatitis
•• Chronic portal triaditis
•• Chronic drug-induced hepatitis
•• Chronic cholangiohepatitis
•• Chronic cholangitis
•• Chronic lobular hepatitis
•• Lobular dissecting hepatitis
•• Chronic major bile duct obstruction
•• Idiopathic hepatic fibrosis

23/04/16 1:10 pm

Liver disorders

341

9.17

9.18

Figure 9.17 Surgical exploratory in a dog showing the
gallbladder and parenchymal liver disease that turned out to be
chronic lymphocytic–plasmacytic hepatitis on biopsy. (Courtesy
M. Schaer)

Figure 9.18 Icteric mucous membranes in a 5-year-old female
spayed Dobermann with chronic hepatitis.
9.19

an important role in perpetuation of hepatocellular
injury.

Pathophysiology
CH has many potential initiating insults but is often idiopathic. Unless the initiating insult is copper or bacterial
infection, the histopathologic description will usually
be that of chronic and active inflammation without an
obvious etiology. CH (Figure 9.17) is characterized by
continuing hepatic inflammation, necrosis, apoptosis,
­
fibrosis, and regeneration. The immune system and oxidative injury play an important role in perpetuation of
disease.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs are nonspecific. Inappetence and lethargy
are common complaints. Occasional vomiting, diarrhea, and pica may also be reported. Behavioral changes
and other signs consistent with hepatoencephalopathy,
­ascites, and icterus may develop later in the course of
disease (Figure 9.18). Signs may be chronic or appear
acute with the disease often advanced before a diagnosis
is made.

Differential diagnosis
Infections; vascular hepatopathy; drug-induced, familial,
or lobular dissecting hepatitis.

Diagnosis
Chronic inflammatory liver disease is characterized
histologically by hepatocellular apoptosis and necro­
sis, a variable mononuclear or mixed inflammatory
cell infiltrate, regeneration, and fibrosis. More ominous histologic features suggestive of progression are

K22463_C009.indd 341

Figure 9.19 Laparoscopic view of regenerative nodules on the
liver in a dog with chronic hepatitis.

implied when confluent areas of necrosis are identified
that form zones of parenchymal collapse that bridge
between portal triads and central veins or span lobules
between portal triads. Chronic inflammatory liver disease should be suspected when recurrent slight to moderate increases of serum ALT, AST, and ALP activities are
observed. Persistence of the chronic inflammatory process for months to years disrupts normal liver architecture (Figure 9.19) and the earlier biochemical pattern
of ‘low-grade’ hepatocellular necrosis progresses to one of
hepatic insufficiency. The waxing and waning nature of
the changes in enzyme activities, as well as the potential
for relatively insignificant increases late in the disease
course, make chronic inflammatory liver disease sometimes difficult to detect biochemically. However, as the
disease progresses, indicators of liver dysfunction, such
as hypoalbuminemia, decreased BUN, and prolonged PT,
are suggestive of advanced liver disease. Earlier indicators of liver insufficiency are hyperbilirubinemia, hyperammonemia, and increased serum bile acids. Disruption
of clotting factor synthesis may result in bleeding, which

23/04/16 1:10 pm

342

Diseases of specific organ systems

9.20

9.21

Figure 9.20 Bleeding from the skin after percutaneous liver
biopsy in a Dobermann with advanced chronic hepatitis.
Prebiopsy clotting studies had been normal.

9.22

is most often characterized by GI bleeding, ­resulting in
melena or low-grade anemia (Figure 9.20). A hypercoagulable state may also be present, resulting in
thrombosis of the portal vasculature. Histologic examination of a liver biopsy ­sample confirms the diagnosis
(Figures 9.21–9.23).

Management
Specific treatment is unavailable in most cases and usually depends on the inciting cause. Supportive therapy
includes vitamin E, ursodeoxycholic acid, SAMe, and
silymarin. Anti-inflammatory or immunosuppressive
therapy using prednisolone, cyclosporine, penicillamine,
azathioprine, and/or colchicine may be useful.

HEPATIC ABSCESS

Figures 9.21, 9.22 (9.21) Histologic appearance of the liver
in chronic hepatitis. There is widespread hepatocellular
degeneration, portal fibrosis (blue staining), and bile stasis.
(9.22) Higher-power view in the same patient shows periportal
round cells (arrows) and bile stasis (arrowheads).
9.23

Definition/overview
Hepatic abscesses following bacterial infection
of the liver occur uncommonly in dogs and cats
(Figures 9.24a–c).

Etiology
Hematogenous or ascending biliary infection may result
in hepatic abscess formation. Gram-negative enteric
organisms or gram-positive and gram-negative anaerobic organisms (especially clostridial organisms) may be
noted. It may be part of systemic infection. Bartonella can
cause diffuse hepatic infection and microabscessation.

Pathophysiology
Hepatic abscesses are usually associated with systemic
infection or hepatic damage. Bacteria arrive in the
liver hematogenously via a systemic arterial or portal venous route (translocation) or via the biliary tree.

K22463_C009.indd 342

Figure 9.23 Copper stain of the liver in a Dobermann with
chronic hepatitis.

Immunosuppression or damaged hepatic parenchyma
results in infection and subsequent abscess formation.

23/04/16 1:11 pm

Liver disorders

9.24

343

Clinical presentation
Usually older dogs or cats with nonspecific GI signs or
signs of sepsis. Fever may be noted but hypothermia is
more likely in cats. Abdominal pain may be noted, especially if rupture of an abscess has occurred resulting in
septic peritonitis.

Differential diagnosis
Inflammatory liver diseases, pancreatitis, septic or bile
peritonitis, hepatic neoplasia.

Diagnosis
a

Complete blood count (CBC) findings are consistent with
inflammation; septic changes may be noted. ALT and AST
activities may be increased but cats may have normal
liver enzyme activities. Hypoalbuminemia, hyperglobulinemia, and mild hyperbilirubinemia are common.
Hypoglycemia associated with sepsis or decreased hepatic
function may be seen. Abdominal ultrasound usually
reveals hypo- to anechoic structures with a hyperechoic
rim within hepatic parenchyma. Fine needle aspiration
for cytology and culture reveals evidence of bacterial
infection. Culture and sensitivity are important in directing definitive treatment.

Management
b

Focal abscesses should be treated with surgical ­excision
or drainage. Percutaneous drainage may be carried out.
Antibiotics based on Gram staining and culture and
­sensitivity should accompany appropriate surgical management. Broad-spectrum coverage with fluoroquinolone
and clavulanate-potentiated amoxicillin or sulbactam-­
potentiated ampicillin, with or without metronidazole for
added anaerobic coverage, is appropriate for t­reatment
while waiting for culture results. Definitive antibiotic treatment should be for a minimum of 6–8 weeks
with ­follow-up ultrasound and blood work evaluation.
Mortality rates may exceed 50%.

ACUTE HEPATITIS AND ACUTE
HEPATOCELLULAR DEGENERATION
AND NECROSIS
c
Figures 9.24 a–c Surgical specimen of an abscessed liver lobe
showing the intact and necrotic tissue. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Cats tend to have multiple small abscesses while dogs
more often have one or a few larger abscesses.

K22463_C009.indd 343

Definition/overview
Acute hepatitis and acute hepatocellular degeneration are characterized by focal or diffuse damage to the
hepatocytes. Hepatocytes may be killed by a spectrum of
insults, but death occurs through apoptosis or necrosis.
Mild insults may cause apoptosis, while stronger insults
will cause necrosis.

23/04/16 1:11 pm

344

Diseases of specific organ systems

9.25

Etiology
The causes of hepatocellular disruption are many and
varied and are often undetermined. Recognized hepatotoxins include: chemical solvents such as carbon tetrachloride; mycotoxins such as aflatoxin; Cyanophyceae
algae; cycasin from cycad plants; drugs such as acetaminophen, azole antifungals, methimazole, and diazepam
in the cat; drugs such as mebendazole, oxybendazole,
trimethoprim–sulfa antibiotics, immunosuppressives
such as cyclosporine, azathioprine, and chlorambucil,
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as
carprofen, azole antifungals, and the artificial sweetener
xylitol in some dogs; certain mushrooms (Amantinum
spp.); viruses including canine adenovirus 1, herpesviruses, FIP virus; bacteria such as Clostridium piliformis,
Bartonella, Leptospira, and possibly Helicobacter. Clinical
signs, biochemical data, and histologic findings do not
usually indicate a specific cause, resulting only in a
­histologic diagnosis of acute hepatic necrosis or ‘toxic’
hepatitis (Figure 9.25).

Pathophysiology
The predominant lesion of acute hepatitis is multifocal
apoptosis and necrosis of individual hepatocytes associated with abnormal liver enzyme activity. The proportion
of each cell type varies with time and the host response,
as well as with the possible cause.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs are variable and include inappetence, lethargy, and vomiting. Icterus develops if the hepatocellular
insult is extensive. Neurologic signs caused by hepatoencephalopathy may be seen.

Figure 9.25 Postmortem liver specimen from a dog with fatal
peracute hepatic necrosis of unknown etiology. Note the loss of
normal parenchymal architecture due to the dark red patches of
necrosis. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

implicates the cause, and it may be contraindicated by
­liver-associated coagulopathies. Histologic examination
can be useful for assessing the severity and extent of the
disease process or determining if the acute onset of clinical disease is associated with chronic histologic changes.
A liver biopsy is justified if recurrent abnormal ALT/AST
values have been documented (see Chronic inflammatory
liver disease).

Management
Few hepatotoxins have specific antidotes but silymarin
has been shown to be effective at blocking hepatocellular binding sites for some toxins. Successful recovery
depends on aggressive supportive therapy and management of oxidative stress. The prognosis is usually good
if the inciting cause is removed, permanent loss of functional mass is less than 50%, and the liver has retained
the capacity to regenerate.

CIRRHOSIS

Differential diagnosis

Definition/overview

Acute pancreatitis, infectious CH, acute gastroenteritis,
and some toxicoses.

Cirrhosis is the end stage of CH in the dog. It is a diffuse
hepatic disease process characterized by fibrosis and by
an alteration of normal hepatic architecture by structurally abnormal regenerative nodules. Portocentral
­
­vascular anastomoses and acquired PSSs may be present
(Figure 9.26). The disease occurs in two morphological presentations: (1) micronodular cirrhosis, in which
regenerative nodules are less than 3 mm in d
­ iameter,
and (2) macronodular cirrhosis, in which the ­nodules are
greater than 3 mm and usually up to several ­centimeters
and of different sizes. Lobular dissecting h
­epatitis
is a form of cirrhosis seen in adolescent and young
adult dogs.

Diagnosis
The predominant biochemical abnormality is an increase
in serum ALT and AST activities, the magnitude of which
depends on the severity and extent of the hepatocellular
damage. Serum ALP is usually normal or only slightly
increased early in the disease process. An increase in
serum bilirubin concentration may occur if a sufficient
number of hepatocytes have been damaged or destroyed
or if there has been sufficient damage to cause cholestasis. The patient will recover if enough functional liver
remains to support regeneration.
A liver biopsy is often neither helpful nor essential in the diagnostic evaluation if the history strongly

K22463_C009.indd 344

Etiology
The cause of cirrhosis is varied and is seldom determined.

23/04/16 1:11 pm

Liver disorders

9.26

345

to an iron deficiency anemia. Some patients are compensated and show few clinical signs, while o
­ thers are icteric
and show signs of liver failure.

Differential diagnosis
Metastatic disease, nodular regeneration, hepatocutaneous syndrome.

Diagnosis

Figure 9.26 Postmortem view showing acquired extrahepatic
shunt vessels (dark tortuous vessels) in a Schnauzer that had
micronodular cirrhosis. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

9.27

Figure 9.27 Ascites in a Cocker Spaniel secondary to hepatic
fibrosis and cirrhosis.

Pathophysiology
Increased hepatic vascular resistance and portal hypertension resulting from the fibrosis and regenerative
nodules eventually lead to icterus, ascites, multiple
­
acquired PSSs, and associated hepatoencephalopathy.

Clinical presentation
Cirrhosis is a common presentation in dogs, but is uncommon in cats. Clinical signs most often include lethargy,
inappetence, ascites (Figure 9.27), and mental depression
that can progress to encephalopathy. GI signs such as
vomiting and/or diarrhea are occasionally seen. Polyuria
and polydipsia are inconsistent findings, but when present may be severe and clinically reminiscent of diabetes
insipidus or psychogenic polydipsia. Bleeding, noted as
petechiae or ecchymoses, may be seen in more severely
affected dogs. GI bleeding is common and may manifest
as obvious melena or may be more subtle and ­contribute

K22463_C009.indd 345

Biochemical findings may indicate severe liver disease,
but they are also often subtle. Serum ALT, AST, and ALP
activities may be moderately increased, or they may
be normal or only slightly increased because of the
decreased hepatic cell mass. Other biochemical abnormalities are more consistent and reflect the reduced
functional capacity of the liver and altered hepatic blood
flow. Decreased BUN and a decreased serum albumin
concentration may be noted. Increased serum bilirubin
concentration is a late indicator of liver insufficiency.
Persistent bilirubinuria will be detected before jaundice
develops. Determination of total serum bile acids and
plasma ammonia concentrations are the most reliable
tests for detecting hepatic insufficiency. Serum bile acids
are appropriately determined in the anicteric patient,
but plasma ammonia is a better indicator of hepatic dysfunction in the dog with icterus. Reduced hepatocellular
mass, altered portal blood flow, and cholestasis result in
an increase in serum bile acid concentrations.
Jaundice may develop in the cirrhotic patient without
prior clinical evidence of liver disease and may require
differentiation from extrahepatic impairment of bile
flow. While ultrasound evaluation of the biliary tree is
the most effective means of noninvasively determining
if extrahepatic bile flow is impaired, the increased total
serum bilirubin concentration is often lower (usually
<102.6 µmol/l [6 mg/dl]) in the cirrhotic patient than in
the patient with extrahepatic biliary obstruction. The
absence of a marked increase in serum ALP activity, a
decrease in BUN, a decrease in serum albumin concentration, or an increased plasma ammonia concentration
supports a diagnosis of cirrhosis.
Histologic confirmation of cirrhosis is important, since
on gross visual inspection cirrhosis may resemble metastatic disease, nodular regeneration, or hepatocutaneous
syndrome (Figure 9.28, 9.29).

Management
Supportive measures are aimed at controlling the complications of chronic liver failure (e.g. hepatic encephalopathy, coagulation abnormalities, and infection). Ascites
should be managed by reducing the sodium content in the

23/04/16 1:11 pm

346

Diseases of specific organ systems

9.28

HEPATOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME
Definition/overview

Figure 9.28 Cross-section of the liver of a 4-year-old Spitz
with severe cirrhosis. Regenerative nodules are dispersed
throughout the parenchyma.

9.29

Hepatocutaneous syndrome is a metabolic disease in
which a vacuolar hepatopathy is associated with an ulcerative necrolytic dermatitis. Other terms used include
superficial necrolytic dermatitis, necrolytic migratory
erythema, diabetic dermatopathy, and metabolic epidermal necrosis.
The disease affects primarily middle aged to older
dogs, with the average age being about 10 years. Males
are more commonly affected than females. No definitive breed predilection has been noted; however, West
Highland White Terriers, Shetland Sheepdogs, Cocker
Spaniels, German Shepherd Dogs, Scottish Terriers, Lhasa
Apsos, and Border Collies may be overrepresented.

Etiology
The cause of the syndrome is unknown. It is characterized
by liver disease in which there is extensive h
­ epatocyte
vacuolization coupled with parenchymal collapse
together with a characteristic superficial necrolytic dermatitis. Diabetes mellitus may also be noted.

Pathophysiology

Figure 9.29 Trichrome stain of a section of cirrhotic liver
showing fibrosis (blue) and nodules (red).

diet and the judicious use of diuretics. Potassium-sparing
diuretics should initially be used as dogs with chronic
fibrosis are prone to developing hypokalemia. Any suspected bleeding associated with gastroenteric ulcerations
should be treated with anti-ulcer drugs such as sucralfate
and proton pump inhibitors. The diet should ideally be
one that contains adequate protein and calories to maintain weight. The protein content of the diet should not be
reduced until necessitated by evidence of hepatoencephalopathy. When signs of hepatoencephalopathy become
apparent it should be managed with lactulose and oral
antibiotics such as neomycin or metronidazole. The protein content of the diet should be reduced only to the extent
necessary to control the neurologic signs. Management of
fibrosis is usually not helpful once a dog is showing signs
of liver failure associated with cirrhosis, but prednisone,
D-penicillamine, colchicine, and silymarin have all been
advocated to reduce fibrosis. Antioxidants and anti-inflammatory drugs, as discussed under chronic inflammatory liver diseases, may also be indicated.

K22463_C009.indd 346

The consistent finding in dogs is liver disease and skin
disease in a patient with severe hypoaminoacidemia. The
cause of either set of lesions is not understood, but it is
speculated that a metabolic derangement that results in
increased catabolism or loss of amino acids is present,
and this sets up an environment that has a detrimental
effect on the skin, resulting in striking inter- and intracellular edema and marked parakeratosis, with resulting ulceration, exudation, and crusting. The footpads
are often affected. Whether the changes in the liver are
a cause or an effect of the hypoaminoacidemia is not
known. In humans, this syndrome is most often seen as a
paraneoplastic condition associated with glucagonomas.
This has been documented in dogs, but in most cases a
glucagonoma or evidence of a pancreatic mass is not
seen. In addition to the characteristic vacuolar hepatopathy, this syndrome has been seen with phenobarbital
and primidone-associated liver disease and intestinal
malabsorption.

Clinical presentation
The most common presentation is the development of
skin lesions that include erythema, crusting, exudation,
ulceration, and alopecia involving the footpads, pressure points on the trunk and limbs, perineum, muzzle,
and periocular areas (Figures 9.30–9.34). Lameness due

23/04/16 1:11 pm

Liver disorders

9.30

347

9.31

9.32
9.33

9.34

Figures 9.30–9.34 These five images illustrate typical lesions
associated with the hepatocutaneous syndrome in the dog,
showing the erythema, crusting, ulceration, and hair loss
involving the foot pads and ventral trunk including the
perineum. (Courtesy R. Marsella)

to footpad ulceration is often an initial presenting complaint. Some dogs may present only for liver disease and
typically show lethargy and anorexia. Most of these dogs

K22463_C009.indd 347

either will have subtle skin lesions at the initial presentation or will develop the skin lesions within weeks of the
initial presentation.

23/04/16 1:11 pm

348

Diseases of specific organ systems

Differential diagnosis
Macronodular cirrhosis, metastatic neoplasia, glucagonoma.

Diagnosis
Serologic abnormalities seen in affected dogs include:
increased ALT, AST, and ALP activities; variable glucagon concentrations (increased in only some patients
with glucagonoma, diabetes mellitus, pancreatitis,
and chronic hepatic insufficiency); fluctuating hyperglycemia without ketoacidosis; nonregenerative to
mildly r­egenerative anemia; abnormalities in red cell
morphology (­polychromasia, anisocytosis, poikilocyto­
sis, target cells); h
­ ypoalbuminemia; and severe hypoaminoacidemia. Liver function test results can range from
normal to severely abnormal. Results of liver cytology
are consistent with severe, vacuolar degeneration of
hepatocytes.
Ultrasonographic imaging of the liver in dogs with
hepatocutaneous syndrome can be very striking.
A unique ‘honeycomb’ pattern is found and this has
been reported as being pathognomonic. This pattern
consists of v
­ ariably sized hypoechoic regions measuring
0.5–1.5 cm in ­diameter surrounded by highly echogenic
borders.
Skin biopsy is the most consistent means of definitively diagnosing hepatocutaneous syndrome. Skin
biopsy specimens should be taken from multiple sites;
include the footpad when lesions are present. The dermatohistopathology of the disease is unique and striking,
with changes consisting of marked inter- and intracellular edema, which is localized to the upper half of the
epidermis. Severe edema produces loss of cellular structure and resultant intraepidermal clefts and vesicles.
Basal cell hyperplasia is also seen. Irregular epidermal
hyperplasia is overlaid by marked diffuse parakeratotic
hyperkeratosis.
The liver lesions reflect chronic hepatocellular degeneration with severe intracellular fat accumulation. Severe
lobular collapse and nodular regeneration are residual
evidence of ongoing hepatocellular regeneration and
degeneration, with resultant parenchymal loss.

Management
Amino acid supplementation has been the primary
approach to treatment either by increasing protein in the
diet or by parenteral administration of amino acid mixtures. Amino acid solution (Aminosyn™ 10%; a crystal­
line amino acid solution) can be administered at a dose
of 24 ml/kg slowly over about 8–12 hours into a large central vein (jugular), initially weekly, then less often as the
lesions improve. Oral protein supplements used by body

K22463_C009.indd 348

builders can supplement the IV administration of amino
acids. Consideration should be given to measuring blood
ammonia concentrations before initiating this treatment
because it is possible to worsen hepatoencephalopathy
with the therapy; however, hepatoencephalopathy is
rarely seen in patients with hepatocutaneous syndrome.
Measuring blood ammonia concentrations can be done
daily or weekly until improvement is noted. Some dogs
may require monthly IV amino acid infusions, but many
dogs can go several months between infusions. The prognosis is guarded, but some dogs will respond well, with
long-term survival possible.

FAMILIAL COPPER TOXICITY
Definition/overview
A hereditary metabolic disturbance resulting in excessive
hepatic copper accumulation is seen in breeds such as the
Bedlington Terrier, Labrador Retriever, Skye Terrier, West
Highland White Terrier, and Dalmatian. The defect is best
characterized in Bedlington Terriers where there is an
autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance and is similar to hepatolenticular degeneration in humans (Wilson’s
disease). The disease is one form of chronic liver disease
that progresses to cirrhosis.

Etiology
In the Bedlington Terrier, the disease is caused by an
inherited metabolic defect caused by a deletion in the
COMMD1 gene leading to an abnormal metallothionein
copper-binding protein. The abnormal protein, or other
derangements in copper metabolism in other breeds, leads
to a defect in copper transport, which causes an accumulation of copper in hepatocytes resulting in inflammation
or necrosis.

Pathophysiology
Accumulation of copper leads to major hepatic injury as
the hepatic mitochondria become damaged by oxidants.
Acute release of copper from the necrotic hepatocytes
may cause hemolytic anemia. With progressive disease,
the liver diminishes in size and a mixture of micro- and
macronodular cirrhosis develops.

Clinical presentation
Young adults may present for signs of acute hepatic failure or the clinical signs and biochemical findings may be
similar to those described for CH.

Differential diagnosis
Infections; drug-induced, familial, or lobular dissecting
hepatitis; idiopathic CH.

23/04/16 1:11 pm

Liver disorders

349

Diagnosis

Diagnosis

Diagnosis is suggested by increased ALT/AST activities
and confirmed by measurement of the copper concentration of fresh liver tissue. Hepatic copper concentrations
tend to increase slowly until middle age, but the concentration is often high enough at 1 year of age to suggest the
­presence of a defect.

A hypersensitivity response is very difficult to prove,
since challenge exposes the patient to unnecessary risk.
Sulfa-containing drugs, anticonvulsants, anthelmintics, NSAIDs, halothane, azole antifungals, xylitol artificial sweeteners, cyclophosphamide, methimazole, and
others have been implicated in veterinary medicine
(Figures 9.35, 9.36).

Management
Dogs are best treated before clinical signs become
severe. Asymptomatic animals may be helped by treating with zinc supplements and restriction of dietary
copper. Treatment with D-penicillamine (10–15 mg/kg
PO q12h) or another chelator such as trientine hydrochloride (10–15 mg/kg PO q12h) prevents progression of the
disease in many dogs and will slowly result in decreased
hepatic copper concentrations. Affected dogs and carriers
of the gene should be identified and removed from breeding programs.

Management
It is prudent to discontinue the inciting drug. If the drug
is essential, then the dose should be modified as much as
possible. Fasting and postprandial bile acid concentrations (assuming there is no increase in serum bilirubin)
should be determined, as major hepatic damage is less
likely if the concentrations are normal.
9.35

DRUG-INDUCED LIVER DISEASE
Definition/overview
Drugs can cause liver injury ranging from a transient
asymptomatic increase in serum transaminase activity
to clinically overt acute or chronic liver disease.

Etiology
Drugs can induce liver injury either by a direct toxic
action, the formation of toxic metabolites, or indirectly
via a hypersensitivity reaction.

Pathophysiology
Direct-acting hepatotoxins usually cause acute necrosis
when the drug or a metabolite interacts chemically with
an essential structural component or metabolic enzyme
system of the hepatocyte (e.g. acetaminophen). A drug or
its metabolite may induce liver injury either by altering
the regulatory system of the immune response so that
reactions to self-antigens are no longer suppressed, or by
altering hepatocyte antigens so that they are no longer
recognized as self-components.

Clinical presentation
Animals may present with several signs depending on
the inciting cause and include depression, ataxia, weight
loss, anorexia, vomiting, behavioral changes, coagulopathy, jaundice, and ascites.

Differential diagnosis
Infections; familial, lobular, or dissecting hepatitis; idiopathic CH.

K22463_C009.indd 349

HEMATOLOGY
PCV
Total WBCs
Platelets
URINALYSIS
SG
pH
Bilirubin
CHEMISTRIES
AP
AST
ALT
Total bilirubin
Total protein
Creatinine
BUN

9.36
0.35 l/l (35%)
7.68 × 109/l (7.68 × 103/µl)
Normal
1.025
6.5
>68 µmol/l (>4 mg/dl)
424 U/l
320 U/l
835 U/l
195 µmol/1 (11.4 mg/dl)
86 g/l (8.6 g/dl)
212 µmol/l (2.4 mg/dl)
4.6 mmol/l (28 mg/dl)

Figures 9.35, 9.36 This 11-year-old hyperthyroid male Siamese
cat had methimazole hepatotoxicosis. He had icterus (9.35) and
elevated liver enzyme levels (9.36). (Courtesy M. Schaer)

23/04/16 1:11 pm

350

Diseases of specific organ systems

EXTRAHEPATOBILIARY
OBSTRUCTION (EXTRAHEPATIC
IMPAIRMENT OF BILE FLOW)

Clinical presentation

Definition/overview
Extrahepatic biliary obstruction refers to the impairment
of bile flow in the biliary system between the liver and
the duodenum. Acute, total extrahepatic impairment of
bile flow is rare.

Etiology
Neoplasia (Figure 9.37), infection, and trauma should
be considered. Chronic pancreatitis and tumors
of the pancreas and the bile duct epithelia are the
most common causes, although cholelithiasis and
­choledocholithiasis have been reported in both the cat
and the dog. Inspissated bile (most often associated with
an ­underlying liver disorder), liver flukes, d
­ uodenal or
pyloric neoplasia, diaphragmatic hernia, congenital
abnormalities, and mucinous cystic hyperplasia are
additional causes.

Signs include inappetence, icterus, and repeated vomiting (especially if the pancreas is involved). Both cats and
dogs may be presented with a chronic history of anorexia,
lethargy, and jaundice. Physical findings are usually unremarkable except for icterus. If a patient with suspected
pancreatic pathology (see Chapter 10: Pancreatic disorders) remains icteric beyond 10–14 days of symptomatic
medical management, an extrahepatic component should
be suspected and ­managed accordingly.

Differential diagnosis
Liver flukes, neoplasia, cholelithiasis, traumatic gallbladder or bile duct lesion.

Diagnosis

Neoplasia or pancreatitis in the dog and cat may result
in a mass effect or sufficient inflammation/fibrosis/fat
necrosis to cause an extraluminal anatomic obstruction
involving the common bile duct (Figure 9.38). Scars usually form around or within the bile ducts. No matter the
cause, obstruction causes leakage of bile from the ducts
into the connective tissue of portal areas. This causes
inflammation and fibrosis of the portal areas, with bile
duct proliferation and an inflammatory infiltrate of
­pigment-laden macrophages, lymphocytes, neutrophils,
and plasma cells.

Extrahepatic cholestasis causes a marked increase in the
hepatic expression of ALP, resulting in a concomitant
increase in serum activity. Increased serum cholesterol
concentrations can also occur. Retained bile acids also
cause hepatocellular damage, with an associated mild
to moderate increase in ALT activity. Severe cholestasis
results in decreased bile acid excretion into the small
intestine with subsequent fat, and therefore fat soluble
vitamin, malabsorption. Clotting studies reveal increased
PT and PTT, which should revert to normal with parenteral vitamin K1 therapy. Bilirubinuria will be noted on
urine dipsticks as strongly positive. Ultrasonography is
a valuable, noninvasive diagnostic tool since it allows
visualization of a dilated extrahepatic bile duct and may
reveal the cause of obstruction (Figure 9.39).
Acute pancreatitis occasionally causes a mild to
moderate increase in ALT activity, a marked increase
in ALP activity, and increased total serum bilirubin

9.37

9.38

Pathophysiology

Figure 9.37 Postmortem image of a cat that had a
cystadenocarcinoma (arrow) of the common bile duct.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C009.indd 350

Figure 9.38 Postmortem image of a cat that had a common
bile duct occlusion (arrow) caused by metastatic pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

23/04/16 1:11 pm

Liver disorders

351

9.40

9.39

Figure 9.39 Ultrasound image of a cat with a cholelith located
in the distal portion of the common bile duct (white arrow).
The common bile duct is dilated above the obstruction (black
arrows). The duodenal papilla is visible (white arrowhead).
(Courtesy L. Gaschen)

concentration. The biochemical pattern may appear
similar to that of extrahepatic biliary obstruction or CH
with intrahepatic cholestasis. An acute onset of repeated
vomiting preceding the development of jaundice suggests acute pancreatitis. Marked increases in serum
pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (cPLI, fPLI) may be
noted. Suggested causes for the transient increase in
the liver enzymes and bilirubin associated with acute
pancreatitis include inflammation of the peripancreatic tissue, which compresses the bile duct, the release
of proteases into the portal blood, which damage hepatobiliary tissue, and oxidative stress, which damages
hepatocellular membranes and results in proinflammatory cytokine release.

Figure 9.40 Survey abdominal radiograph in a cat showing a
collection of gallstones (arrow). This was an incidental finding
(as was the airgun pellet). (Courtesy B. Jones)

Management

Etiology

Surgical correction is the treatment of choice. If no
obstruction is found at laparotomy, the liver should be
biopsied and the patient managed accordingly. Treatment
with ursodeoxycholic acid and antioxidants such as acetylcysteine, SAMe/silybin combinations, or vitamin E is
also helpful.

Dogs and cats typically develop mixed choleliths composed of calcium salts, bilirubin, and occasionally cholesterol. This is different from humans where choleliths are
typically dietary-induced cholesterol-containing stones.

CHOLETHIASIS (GALLSTONES)
Definition/overview
Cholelithiasis occasionally occurs in dogs and cats. Most
are incidental findings on abdominal radiographs or at
necropsy (Figure 9.40). On rare occasions, choleliths can
cause obstruction of the common bile duct, but s­ imply
finding them on radiographs in patients with evidence
of liver disease is not justification for removal.

K22463_C009.indd 351

Pathophysiology
Gallstones in dogs usually contain mucin, calcium, and
bilirubin. In cats they are more often calcium carbonate
and mixed choleliths composed of calcium carbonate, calcium bilirubinate, and cholesterol.

Clinical presentation
Dogs and cats with cholelithiasis are often asymptomatic. If signs are apparent, they may include vomiting,
icterus (the stones move into the common bile duct and
cause obstruction), anorexia, fever, and abdominal pain.
Middle aged small breed dogs and cats are predisposed.

23/04/16 1:11 pm

352

Diseases of specific organ systems

9.41

Occasionally, perforation of the gallbladder or common
bile duct is seen.

Differential diagnosis
Parasitism, neoplasia, nonbiliary tract disorders, gallbladder mucocele.

Diagnosis
While seldom radiopaque, choleliths are typically
easily diagnosed by abdominal ultrasonography
(Figures 9.41, 9.42). They appear as hyperechoic foci with
acoustic shadowing originating from the gallbladder or
common bile duct. Dilation of the common bile ducts and/
or intrahepatic ducts may be noted.

Management
In cases with evidence of bile flow obstruction, exploratory laparotomy for surgical removal of stones should
be performed and the patency of the common bile duct
assessed. Follow-up therapy with ursodeoxycholic acid,
antioxidants, and antimicrobials is recommended.

BILE DUCT RUPTURE
Definition/overview

9.42

Figures 9.41, 9.42 Dog with cholecystitis and bilirubin
gallstones. (9.41) Ultrasound image. (9.42) The surgically
removed gallbladder, which was diagnosed as cholecystitis.
Gallstones are also present. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Obstruction or trauma may result in perforation or rupture of the structures of the biliary tract. The common
bile duct, distal to the opening of the last hepatic duct,
seems to be the most common site of ductal rupture.

9.43

Etiology
Blunt trauma, penetrating wounds, pathology associated
with a tumor or infection, and liver biopsies have been
associated with rupture of the biliary system.

Pathophysiology
Extravasation of bile elicits a strong inflammatory
response and causes transudation of lymph from serosal
surfaces (Figure 9.43).

Clinical presentation
The clinical course is usually protracted. There is acute
abdominal pain for the first 48 hours followed by
anorexia, depression, fever, slow abdominal distension,
and icterus. Hepatobiliary sepsis is life-threatening.

Differential diagnosis

Figure 9.43 Cholecystitis in a 4-year-old German Shepherd
Dog. The inflamed gallbladder had ruptured, causing a bile
peritonitis. Note the inspissated bile in the gallbladder. A pure
culture of E. coli was grown from the purulent abdominal fluid.

Management
Exploratory surgery is always indicated.

Hepatic tumors, acute pancreatitis, FIP.

GALLBLADDER MUCOCELES

Diagnosis

Definition/overview

An exudative, yellow–green-colored abdominal effusion is
found at abdominocentesis. Macrophages containing bile
pigment may be noted in a smear of the fluid (Figure 9.44).

Gallbladder mucoceles are an increasingly common finding in dogs; they appear as dilation or distension of the
gallbladder with accumulated mucus. Marked distension

K22463_C009.indd 352

23/04/16 1:11 pm

Liver disorders

9.44

353

Management
The management of dogs that are not showing clinical
signs is controversial, as it is unknown what percentage
of dogs with gallbladder mucoceles will progress to a gallbladder rupture. Asymptomatic dogs should be treated
with ursodeoxycholic acid, antioxidants, and antimicrobials and monitored via abdominal ultrasound. Dogs
showing clinical signs should have a cholecystectomy
(Figure 9.46).

LIVER TUMORS
Figure 9.44 Cellular appearance of the fluid in bile peritonitis.
Note the neutrophils and macrophages containing bile (arrow).
(Courtesy D. Meyer)

may eventually result in rupture of the gallbladder and
subsequent peritonitis.

Definition/overview
Primary and metastatic tumors occur in the liver.
Metastatic tumors are reportedly twice as frequent
as primary tumors. Primary tumors include bile duct

9.45

Etiology
The cause is not known, but it is suspected that gallbladder mucoceles result from dysfunction of mucus-secreting
cells within the gallbladder mucosa and altered wall
contractility.

Pathophysiology
Mucus hypersecretion and formation of a biliary sludge
result in the formation of a semi-solid mass of gallbladder contents that cannot pass from the gallbladder to the
common bile duct. Over time the gallbladder distends
and secondary cholecystitis may result. Rupture of the
gallbladder and resultant peritonitis is possible, but is
not seen in all cases. An association with hyperadrenocorticism and hypothyroidism has been postulated.

9.46

Clinical presentation
Nonspecific clinical signs such as vomiting, anorexia, and
lethargy are usually the presenting complaint, but the
finding of a gallbladder mucocele can be an incidental
finding on ultrasound examination of the abdomen for
another reason (Figure 9.45). Physical examination findings can include abdominal pain, jaundice, and fever if
there is inflammation of the hepatobiliary tree.

Differential diagnosis
Pancreatitis, bile duct obstruction.

Diagnosis
Ultrasonography is a highly reliable means of identifying
gallbladder mucocele and gallbladder rupture. The gallbladder may have a ‘kiwi fruit’ appearance.

K22463_C009.indd 353

Figures 9.45, 9.46 Dog with a mucocele. (9.45) Ultrasound
image. (9.46) Different dog at surgery, showing a severely
inflamed gallbladder with several foci of necrosis. These would
have perforated if surgery had not been done immediately.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

23/04/16 1:11 pm

354

Diseases of specific organ systems

9.47

carcinoma, hepatocellular adenoma and carcinoma (hepatoma), and lymphoma. Hepatocellular carcinomas have
been associated with a paraneoplastic hypoglycemia in
the dog. Lymphosarcoma is the most common liver tumor,
especially in cats.

Etiology
The cause of primary tumors is not usually determined.
Metastatic tumors in the dog often arise from the pancreas, mammary glands, adrenals, bone, lungs, thyroid,
GI tract, and spleen, whereas in the cat they usually arise
from the kidney, pancreas, and GI tract. Malignant transformation of cystadenomas is possible.

Figure 9.47 Abdominal distension and loss of muscle mass in a
Bull Terrier suffering from advanced hepatocellular carcinoma.

Pathophysiology

9.48

Biliary and hepatocellular cancer occur as multifocal
nodular or diffuse infiltrations of large areas of liver or
as solitary masses.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs are vague and nonspecific in most patients.
They include inappetence progressing to anorexia, weight
loss, vomiting, abdominal distension, and terminal jaundice in some patients (Figure 9.47).

Differential diagnosis
Parasitism, hepatobiliary cysts, cirrhosis.

Figure 9.48 Lateral abdominal radiograph showing marked
hepatomegaly and dorsal displacement of the stomach in an
older dog with hepatic carcinoma. (Courtesy L. Gaschen)

Diagnosis
Those tumors that do not cause extrahepatic biliary
obstruction may cause increases in serum AST, ALT, and
ALP activities and total serum bilirubin concentration
that may appear similar to the pattern associated with CH.
Abdominal radiographs are often read as normal, but they may reveal hepatomegaly (Figure 9.48).
Hepatocellular carcinomas may be very large and noted
on palpation or abdominal radiographs. Ultrasoundguided biopsy or laparotomy and biopsy are essential for
diagnosis of neoplastic disease. The gross appearance of
neoplastic lesions may appear similar to nodules associated with cirrhosis (Figure 9.49). Histologic evaluation
can differentiate between the two lesions. Microscopic
examination of a hepatic aspirate can help diagnose
hepatic lymphoma (Figure 9.50).

K22463_C009.indd 354

9.49

Figure 9.49 Postmortem specimen from a dog with
macronodular cirrhosis. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

23/04/16 1:11 pm

Liver disorders

9.50

Figure 9.50 Microscopic examination of an hepatic aspirate
can help differentiate between hepatic lymphoma and lipidosis
in cats with jaundice and hepatomegaly. This aspirate from
the liver of a 13-year-old Siamese confirmed a diagnosis of
lymphoma (arrows).

355

9.51

Figure 9.51 Lateral abdominal radiograph showing the typical
cushingoid pendulous abdomen with liver enlargement.
(Courtesy L. Gaschen)

Management

Pathophysiology

Primary tumors confined to a single lobe may be resected
surgically. The abdominal cavity should be evaluated
for metastatic spread and biopsy specimens of hepatic
lymph nodes should be obtained. Chemotherapy may be
appropriate in selected patients.

While most dogs receiving glucocorticoids accumulate hepatocellular glycogen, not all develop the same
degree of change. Some dogs develop focal necrosis and
severe hepatomegaly, whereas others exhibit almost
no response. The reason for this individual variation is
unknown. Scottish Terriers with vacuolar hepatopathy
typically do not have clinical signs. Increased ALP activity is often dramatic. Adrenal steroids are thought to play
a role in the development of the vacuolar hepatopathy in
most cases. Progression to inflammation and fibrosis is
more likely in Scottish Terriers than other dogs with steroid hepatopathy.

VACUOLAR AND STEROID HEPATOPATHY
Definition/overview
This is a unique and idiosyncratic response of the canine
liver to either exogenous administration or endogenous
overproduction of corticosteroids and perhaps adrenal
sex hormones. The disorder is characterized by hepatocellular glycogen accumulation, with associated hepatomegaly and a variety of clinical and laboratory signs, most
often associated with the steroids themselves. Scottish
Terriers are reported to have a breed-specific syndrome
associated with a vacuolar hepatopathy and elevated
serum ALP.

Etiology
Exogenous administration of glucocorticoids and naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism can induce
morphologic changes in hepatocytes and abnormal
clinicopathologic test results in the dog. Other steroid
hormones and adrenal sex hormones may cause similar
changes. Some dogs can acquire vacuolated hepatopathy
without any specific etiology. Steroid hepatopathy is not
typically seen in cats.

K22463_C009.indd 355

Clinical presentation
Dogs present with clinical signs associated with corticosteroid use – a history of polydipsia/polyuria, polyphagia,
nocturnal restlessness, panting, and weight gain. Later
there may be a history of ventral and lateral abdominal
hairlessness, thin skin, pendulous abdomen (Figure 9.51),
and muscle wasting. There may be palpable hepatomegaly. Icterus is absent. There may be a history of oral, otic,
or ophthalmic administration of corticosteroids. Failing
this, endogenous overproduction of glucocorticoids
should be suspected.

Differential diagnosis
Includes all causes of hepatomegaly including hepatic
neoplasia, other causes of vacuolar hepatopathy, and
hepatic amyloidosis.

23/04/16 1:11 pm

356

Diseases of specific organ systems

Diagnosis
Increased ALP activity is the most consistent finding. The
increased ALP activity is predominantly due to an isoenzyme of ALP produced by the canine liver in response
to glucocorticoids. ALP activity may be dramatically
increased, similar to the increases associated with extrahepatic biliary obstruction and cholangitis. In contrast,
serum bilirubin concentration remains normal in most
dogs with steroid hepatopathy. Also, while ALT may show
a mild to moderate increase, the AST usually remains
close to normal (Figure 9.52). The serum bile acid concentration may be mildly increased (usually <25 µmol/l in
the fasted state [10.25 µg/ml]).
Microscopic examination of a hepatic aspirate or
biopsy specimen reveals a characteristic vacuolar degeneration as glycogen is lost during tissue fixation and
staining (Figure 9.53).

Management

rarely in dogs. Accompanying hepatic failure may be
noted (Figures 9.54a, b).

9.53

Figure 9.53 Histologic appearance of canine glucocorticoid
hepatopathy. Note the vacuolated cells that contained glycogen
prior to fixation.

Withdrawal of steroid therapy or treatment of endogenous adrenal production is usually all that is required.
Treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid and SAMe may hasten recovery.

9.54

CANINE HEPATIC LIPIDOSIS
Definition/overview
Accumulation of small (microvesicular) lipid-containing
vacuoles within the cytoplasm of hepatocytes is seen

9.52
Glucose
BUN
Creatinine
Cholesterol
Total bilirubin
Total protein
Albumin
AP
Calcium
Phosphorus
AST
ALT
Globulin
Chloride
Sodium
Potassium
Total CO 2

5.2 mmol/l (93 mg/dl)
6.1 mmol/l (17 mg/dl)
61.9 µmol/l (0.7 mg/dl)
15.6 mmol/l (607 mg/dl)
5.1 µmol/l (0.3 mg/dl)
65 g/l (6.5 g/dl)
34 g/l (3.4 g/dl)
2,519 U/l
2.5 mmol/l (10.1 mg/dl)
0.6 mmol/l (2.0 mg/dl)
88 U/l
239 U/l
31 g/l (3.1 g/dl)
107 mmol/l (107 mEq/l)
146 mmol/l (146 mEq/l)
3.9 mmol/l (3.9 mEq/l)
22 mmol/l (22 mEq/l)

a

b
Figure 9.52 Serum chemistry profile showing some of
the commonly elevated parameters (in bold) caused by
glucocorticoid hepatopathy in the dog.

K22463_C009.indd 356

Figures 9.54a, b Postmortem specimen and histopathology
from a diabetic ketoacidotic dog dying from fuminating hepatic
lipidosis. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

23/04/16 1:11 pm

Liver disorders

Etiology
Hepatic lipidosis in dogs is usually associated with ketoacidotic diabetes mellitus or juvenile hypoglycemia of
small breed dogs.

Pathophysiology
Excessive transport of fatty acids into the liver from
mobilization of fat stores associated with insulin resistance, decreased hepatocyte and mitochondrial oxidation
of fatty acids, and decreased transport of lipoproteins
from the liver. Severe lipid accumulation may result in
severe hepatic failure.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs are usually due to ketoacidotic diabetes
mellitus or associated with starvation and hypoglycemia
in toy breed neonates.

Diagnosis
Hepatic cytology or biopsy.

Management
Glucose supplementation, nutritional support, and treatment of any underlying disease should be attempted in
neonatal toy breed puppies with hepatic lipidosis. Dogs
with diabetes mellitus should be treated for ketoacidosis.
Because liver failure and hepatoencephalopathy may be
contributing to clinical signs, appropriate treatment of
fulminant hepatic failure and hepatoencephalopathy is
important.

CONGENITAL PORTOSYSTEMIC VASCULAR
ANOMALIES (PORTOSYSTEMIC SHUNTS)
Definition/overview
Congenital anomalies of the portal vascular system (PSSs)
occur commonly in the dog and are being recognized
with increasing frequency in the cat. The anomalous
vascular development can involve one or more vessels of
the hepatic portal circulation. Single intrahepatic shunts
are more common in large breed dogs and single extra­
hepatic shunts are more common in cats and small breed
dogs. Other intrahepatic vascular anomalies are being
identified.

357

the latter breed as well as in other small breeds and in
cats. Yorkshire Terriers and Miniature Schnauzers are
breeds that appear to be at increased risk. Mixed breed
cats are most commonly affected and of the purebreds,
Himalayans and Persians appear to be at increased risk.
Affected male dogs and cats are often cryptorchid. Most
animals develop signs by 10 months of age, but they may
be subtle and adequately compensated (or accepted by
the owner) until they become more prominent later in life
(up to 10 years of age).

Pathophysiology
Pathologic changes are secondary to decreased portal
venous blood flow with subsequent increased hepatic
arteriolar flow. Portal blood shunts past sinusoidal flow
and hepatocellular contact, resulting in systemic delivery
of materials absorbed from the GI tract including products
of the intestinal microbiome. The liver appears grossly
small and often mottled, and there is typically atrophy of
the hepatocytes, with arteriolar hyperplasia and small or
absent portal veins. Other features include sinusoidal congestion, biliary hyperplasia, lipogranulomas, increased
periportal connective tissue, and periportal vacuolization.

Clinical presentation
The signalment and history provide important clues to
the diagnosis. Affected animals may be normal in stature
or may be small for their age, less active than their littermates, and may be labeled ‘poor-doers’. Neurologic signs
are common in the dog and include seizures and personality changes (Figures 9.55, 9.56). Intermittent depression, disorientation, aggression, head pressing, blindness,
mydriasis, and seizures have also been observed. Cats
often show depression and anorexia. Polydipsia/­polyuria,
ptyalism (Figure 9.57), and recurrent formation of
9.55

Etiology
The reason, or reasons, congenital PSSs develop is not
known, but there appears to be a genetic basis in certain
lines of Miniature Schnauzers, Irish Wolfhounds, Old
English Sheepdogs, and Cairn Terriers. A proposed microvascular dysplasia within the liver has been reported for

K22463_C009.indd 357

Figures 9.55 A Poodle with hepatic encephalopathy
demonstrating behavioral changes such as head pressing and
‘getting lost’ in corners.

23/04/16 1:11 pm

358

Diseases of specific organ systems

9.56

Figure 9.56 An abrasion on the head of a Pug as a result of
head pressing. The animal was diagnosed with a portosystemic
shunt and the signs disappeared after corrective surgery.
9.57

9.58

Figure 9.58 Dobermann littermates. The smaller dog has a
portosystemic shunt with associated stunted growth.

immunodeficiency virus, toxoplasmosis), idiopathic epilepsy, metabolic disorders (e.g. hypoglycemia, thiamine
deficiency), hydrocephalus, toxicity.

Diagnosis

Figure 9.57 Ptyalism in a Himalayan kitten with hepatic
encephalopathy as a result of a portosystemic shunt.

urinary calculi are also common findings. Renal, cystic,
and urethral calculi may be the first clinical indication
of an underlying congenital PSS in some dogs. Urate urolithiasis develops commonly. Signs may or may not be
associated with eating. Unexpected prolonged recovery
from general anesthesia or an exaggerated response to
tranquilizers has been noted.
Findings on physical examination are often unremarkable. Occasionally, an inappropriately small body stature
is present (Figure 9.58). Slightly enlarged kidneys have
been palpated in some cats or small dogs, but this is more
often detected radiographically.

Differential diagnosis
Portal vein hypoplasia, congenital enzyme deficiency
of the urea cycle, infectious diseases (canine distemper,
FIP, diseases related to feline leukemia virus and feline

K22463_C009.indd 358

ALT and ALP activities may be normal or only slightly
increased. Serum albumin and BUN concentrations are
decreased in many patients with a PSS. Decreased concentrations occur because of hepatic atrophy and insufficient
portal blood flow. These two parameters are valuable indicators of liver insufficiency on the biochemical profile.
A mild hypoglycemia may also be detected. The combination of a compatible history and biochemical abnormalities indicates the need for a function test such as serum
bile acids or blood ammonia. Ammonium biurate crystals may be observed in the urine sediment (Figure 9.59)
and evaluation of the hemogram may reveal a slightly
decreased MCV. Serum iron is decreased in over 50% of
dogs with confirmed PPS.
Imaging may reveal microhepatica in some patients
(Figure 9.60). Visual confirmation of the portal vascular
anomaly requires ultrasonography, CT angiography, scintigraphy, a cranial mesenteric angiogram, splenoportography, or jejunal vein portography (Figure 9.61).
Histologically, the liver may appear normal architecturally or there may be subtle changes of hepatic cord
atrophy, small or absent portal veins, and an increase in
arteriolar structures. Other nonspecific findings that may
be reported include periportal or midzonal vacuolization,
mild to moderate biliary hyperplasia, mild periportal
fibrosis, and foci of iron-rich fatty macrophages (lipogranulomas). The latter finding is rare in normal dogs under
the age of 6 years and should raise the suspicion of an
underlying congenital portosystemic shunt.

23/04/16 1:11 pm

Liver disorders

9.59

359

Management
Surgical ligation or compression of the anomalous vessel
is the treatment of choice in the dog and cat, but some
shunts are now being treated by the implantation of coils
under fluoroscopic guidance. If surgery is not an option,
medical management with a low-quantity/high-quality
protein diet, plus lactulose and neomycin or metronidazole to ameliorate signs of encephalopathy, may provide
satisfactory results for months to several years depending on the severity of the vascular insufficiency.

FURTHER READING
Figure 9.59 Ammonium biurate crystal (arrow) in the urine
sediment in a dog with a portacaval shunt.
9.60

Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (2010) Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 7th edn. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.
Nelson RW, Couto CG (2014) Small Animal Internal Medicine, 5th
edn. Elsevier Mosby, St. Louis.
Rothuizen J, Bunch SE, Charles JA et al. (2006) WSAVA Standards
for Clinical and Histological Diagnosis of Canine and Feline
Liver Disease – WSAVA Liver Standardization Group. Elsevier
Saunders, St. Louis.
Washabau RJ, Day MJ (2013) Canine & Feline Gastroenterology.
Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.

Figure 9.60 Lateral radiograph showing microhepatica, as
evidenced by the vertical gastric axis, in a Dalmatian with a
portosystemic shunt.
9.61

Figure 9.61 Mesenteric venous portography confirmed a shunt
(arrows) in this 2-year-old Lhasa Apso.

K22463_C009.indd 359

23/04/16 1:11 pm

This page intentionally left blank

361

Chapter 10
Pancreatic disorders
Michael Schaer

INTRODUCTION

Table 10.1 Some causes of acute pancreatitis in humans.

Disorders of the digestive tract occur commonly in dogs
and cats. The clinical signs involving diseases of the liver,
pancreas, and bowel can show considerable overlap. This
makes an accurate diagnosis a formidable challenge to
the small animal practitioner.
Most experienced internists will attest that there is seldom anything pathognomonic about acute pancreatitis.
Therefore, if a diagnosis is to be made, a thorough review
of all the available clinical findings is necessary.

* Biliary tract disease
Ethanol abuse
Infectious agents (viral, bacterial, toxoplasmosis)
Peptic ulcer
Methanol
* Trauma, surgery
Scorpion bites (Trinidad)
* Vascular factors – ischemia, thrombosis
* Carcinoma of the pancreas
* Hyperlipoproteinemias (type I, IV, and V in humans)
* Hypotensive shock
* Hypercalcemia
* Ductal obstruction by tumors
* Drugs
* High-fat diet – dogs only
Hereditary pancreatitis, pancreas divisum

ACUTE PANCREATITIS
Definition/overview
Of the various clinical disorders treated by the small animal practitioner, there is probably none more difficult
and frustrating to treat than acute pancreatitis. Despite
the continuing acquisition of new knowledge regarding
pancreatic physiology and pathophysiology, there is still
no miracle treatment that can directly counteract the
ravages of acute necrotizing pancreatitis. However, the
optimal therapeutic outcome depends to a great extent
on the clinician’s working knowledge of the physiology,
pathophysiology, clinical features, and medical and surgical treatments for this disorder in the dog and cat.

Etiology
Fortunately, the dog and cat are spared from many of the
causes of pancreatitis that affect humans (Table 10.1).
However, there are several general mechanisms that
should be considered such as obstruction to the pancreatic duct, dietary factors, infectious agents, trauma, toxic
drug reactions, metabolic abnormalities, and vascular
alterations.

Pathophysiology
At the cellular level the calcium-dependent intra-acinar
cell activation of pancreatic digestive zymogens, particularly proteases, is an early event in the initiation
of acute pancreatitis. Activation of transcription factor

K22463_C010.indd 361

* Causes that have been implicated in dogs and cats

NF-kB also occurs early in experimental pancreatitis.
Early pathologic Ca2+ mobilization into acinar cells has
a central role in the pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis. Another early acinar cell event is thought to be a
decrease in ­compartmental pH. Other contributing factors to p
­ athogenesis include neurally mediated inflammation and the ­production of large amounts of reactive
oxygen species along with the simultaneous depletion of
antioxidants.
The neutrophil migration that takes place is a result of
the activation of trypsin, chymotrypsin, and oxygen radicals. The cytokines that are subsequently produced go on
to cause the systemic inflammatory response syndrome.
Other factors that augment the inflammatory response
include altered pancreatic microcirculation, a shift from
acinar cell apoptosis to necrosis, and the activation of
other vasogenic pathways.
Prostaglandins are thought to have a key role in the
pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis (Figure 10.1). Suspected
mechanisms for these cyclo-oxygenase-2 effects include
regulating heat shock protein 70 ­expression, inducible
nitric oxide synthase activity, release of substance P,

23/04/16 1:35 pm

362

Diseases of specific organ systems

Insult

10.1

Pancreas

Phospholipase A2

Injury

Arachidonate

5-HPETE
metabolites

Injury
Lipoxygenase

Cyclo-oxygenase

Leukotrienes

Prostaglandins
and thromboxanes

Figure 10.1 The role of prostaglandins in acute pancreatitis.
Arachidonic acid metabolites are important mediators of
inflammation in acute pancreatitis. 5-HPETE,
5-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid. (Source: Nager AB,
Gorelick FS (2004) Acute pancreatitis. Current Opinions in
Gastroenterology 20(5):439–443.)

and neutrophil function. A number of ­factors that can
cause the described disturbances of cellular metabolism
will cause increased permeability of cellular lipoprotein
membranes surrounding the lysosomal hydrolases in
the acinar cells, with resultant inappropriate proenzyme
activation and autodigestion. At first the antiproteases
will attempt to counteract the released proteases, but
eventually the activation of the pancreatic proteolytic
enzyme cascade will prevail and cause clinical acute
pancreatitis. The characteristics of activated ­pancreatic
enzymes and their effects on the pancreas and other tissues are shown in Table 10.2 and illustrated pathologically in Figures 10.2–10.22.
Marked hypotension can be observed in dogs and cats
with acute pancreatitis, and it is probably the main contributing factor to their demise. Studies of the hemodynamic consequences of severe pancreatitis in humans
demonstrate that the cardiac index is increased and the
systemic vascular resistance is decreased; these findings
are similar to those in patients with sepsis. The mechanisms responsible for these effects involve various inflammatory mediators including interleukin (IL)-1, IL-2, IL-6,
IL-8, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), platelet activating
factor, and interferon gamma. Circulating vasoactive

Table 10.2 Characteristics of the pancreatic enzymes.*
Enzyme

Substrate

Effects

Lipase

Triglyceride

Fat necrosis
Hypocalcemia
Cell membrane damage

Phospholipase A2

Cell membranes
Phosphatides

Lysophosphatide formation
Membrane destruction
Vascular leakage
Acute respiratory distress syndrome

Trypsin

Other proenzymes
Kallikreinogen
Scleroproteins

Coagulation necrosis
Vascular leakage, shock
Proteolysis
Coagulopathy
Kinin release

Chymotrypsin/
carboxypeptidase

Scleroproteins

Coagulation necrosis
Proteolysis
Vascular leakage

Elastase

Scleroproteins
Elastic/collagen fibers of blood
vessels

Coagulation necrosis
Elastocollagenolysis
Proteolysis
Vascular leakage
Hemorrhage

Kallikrein

Kinins

Kinin release

Modified from Büchler MW, Uhl W, Malfertheiner P et al. (2004) (eds.) Diseases of the Pancreas. Karger, Basel.

K22463_C010.indd 362

23/04/16 1:35 pm

Pancreatic disorders

10.2

363

10.5

Figure 10.2 This 7-year-old male Poodle was taken to surgery
after a 5–7-day period of medical treatment accompanied by
persistent vomiting. Shown is edematous pancreatitis.
10.3

Figure 10.3 Postmortem specimen illustrating edematous
pancreatitis and extensive peripancreatic fat necrosis. This
patient was a 4-year-old female Yorkshire Terrier that also had
diabetic ketoacidosis and renal failure.
10.4

Figure 10.4 Surgical view of hemorrhagic necrotic pancreatitis
in a 10-year-old male Wirehaired Fox Terrier. Note how one half
of the pancreas is hemorrhagic and the other half is edematous
(arrows).

K22463_C010.indd 363

Figure 10.5 Radiograph, taken from the dog in Figure 10.4,
typical of acute pancreatitis, showing increased fluid density
in the right upper abdominal quadrant (arrow) and lateral
displacement of the duodenum.

10.6

Figure 10.6 Over the ensuing year, the dog in Figures 10.4
and 10.5 had several episodes of relapsing pancreatitis that
eventually terminated with renal shutdown. This postmortem
specimen shows chronic pancreatic scarring along with recent
necrotic changes.

23/04/16 1:35 pm

364

Diseases of specific organ systems

10.7

Figure 10.7 Postmortem view of the abdomen of a 13-year-old
female Lhasa Apso showing diffuse edematous pancreatitis
accompanied by diffuse calcium soap deposition (arrows)
throughout the mesentery and omentum.

10.10

Figure 10.10 The same dog as in Figure 10.9, showing the
intercostal muscles with calcium soap deposits (arrow).

10.8

10.11

Figure 10.8 Another view of the specimen shown in
Figure 10.7. This calcium soap formation is one of the accepted
explanations for the lowered serum calcium level that can
accompany acute pancreatitis.

Figure 10.11 The dog in Figures 10.9 and 10.10 had edematous
pancreatitis (arrows).

10.9

Figure 10.9 This 14-year-old male Dachshund had pleural
effusion along with acute pancreatitis. Shown is the
serosanguineous pleural effusion that is accompanied by
calcium soap deposits on the pleural membranes underlying
the thoracic viscera.

K22463_C010.indd 364

10.12

Figure 10.12 Postmortem findings of severe hemorrhagic
pancreatitis complicated by pathologic coagulation causing
infarction to the duodenum (arrow) and omentum.

23/04/16 1:35 pm

Pancreatic disorders

10.13

Figure 10.13 Marked pancreatic necrosis in the specimen
shown in Figure 10.12. The peripancreatic lymph node is
markedly enlarged from hemorrhagic necrosis.
10.15

365

10.14

Figure 10.14 Multiple splenic infarcts in the 9-year-old dog
in Figures 10.12 and 10.13. It was taken to surgery where it
expired. Disseminated intravascular coagulation was the cause
of the hypercoagulable state.
10.16

Figure 10.15 Surgical view of a 16-year-old cat with chronic
active pancreatitis. This cat had been hospitalized 3 years
earlier with acute pancreatitis, which responded well to
conservative treatment.
10.17

Figure 10.16 This 10-year-old cat was taken to surgery for the
primary problems of vomiting, depression, and a hemorrhagic
abdominal effusion. Shown is hemorrhagic pancreatitis. Copious
surgical lavage and the insertion of abdominal drains until
2–3 days postoperatively would be the usual surgical measures
for this type of pathology.
10.18

Figure 10.17 After 7 days of medical therapy, this 12-year-old
female cat was taken to surgery because it showed no signs of
improvement. Shown is hemorrhagic pancreatitis accompanied
by extensive peripancreatitic and mesenteric calcium soap
formation (arrow). Postoperatively, nutrition was provided
through a jejunostomy tube that was inserted at the time of
surgery. This cat survived after 3 weeks of illness.

K22463_C010.indd 365

Figure 10.18 This 5-year-old male Labrador Retriever had
vomiting, fever, depression, and abdominal pain.

23/04/16 1:35 pm

366

Diseases of specific organ systems

10.19

10.22

a
Figure 10.19 Blood samples taken from the dog shown in
Figure 10.18 were markedly lipemic. The patient died despite
intensive medical efforts.
10.20

b
Figures 10.22a, b (a) Pancreatic phlegmon is illustrated in
this surgical view showing extensive parapancreatic soft tissue
adhesions. (b) The pancreas from the same dog showing
extensive saponification.
Figure 10.20 Postmortem examination of the dog in
Figure 10.18 showed diffuse thyroid atrophy. The severe
atherosclerotic vascular lesions shown here involved the
coronary arteries (arrows).
10.21

com‑pounds, such as bradykinin and myocardial depressant factor (in the dog), resulting from pancreatic necrosis, also contribute to the vasomotor instability. The low
blood pressure may also be due to sequestration of fluid
from the plasma space into the ‘third spaces’ of the peritoneal cavity and retroperitoneum. Experiments in the dog
have shown that approximately 35% of the total plasma
volume can be lost from the circulation 4 hours after the
induction of acute pancreatitis. The local and systemic
effects of acute pancreatitis are shown in Figure 10.23.

Clinical presentation

Figure 10.21 There was also extensive pancreatic phlegmon
formation in the dog shown in Figure 10.18. The primary cause
of this dog’s pancreatitis was hypothyroidism, which caused
marked hyperlipidemia; this, in turn, could have triggered the
acute pancreatitis. Hyperlipidemia is a well-known common
cause of acute pancreatitis in humans.

K22463_C010.indd 366

Most occurrences of acute pancreatitis in the dog involve
middle aged, obese females; however, dogs with normal
weight and male dogs can also be affected. The most common historical signs involve a sudden onset of vomiting, anorexia, and mental depression. Some occurrences
reportedly follow the ingestion of a fatty meal, although
this might not be a consistent finding. Initially, the vomitus might contain partially undigested food and this may
be followed subsequently by vomitus consisting of bile and

23/04/16 1:35 pm

Pancreatic disorders

367

10.23
Acute pancreatitis

Local

Systemic

Lungs
● Edema
● Pleural effusion
● Hemorrhage
● Necrosis
● Acute respiratory distress syndrome
● Pneumonia
● Pancreatic abscess
● Pancreatic pseudocyst

Heart

Sepsis

Circulation

● Pericardial effusion ● Hypovolemia
● Without septic shock
● Arrhythmias
● With septic shock
● Shock
● Hyperdynamic circulation
phase of shock

● Anemia
Metabolic

● Hypocalcemia
● Hyperglycemia
● Hypoglycemia
● Hypokalemia
● Hypoproteinemia
● Hypoalbuminemia
● Hyperlipidemia

Coagulation

● Thrombocytopenia
● Disseminated intravascular
coagulation

Kidney

● Acute kidney injury
○
○

Oliguria
Anuria

Figure 10.23 Pathophysiologic consequences of acute pancreatitis. The adverse effects of acute pancreatitis are far reaching, with
involvement of several organ systems. In many cases this can lead to multiple organ dysfunction and the patient’s demise. (Modified
from Büchler MW, Uhl W, Malfertheiner P et al. (2004) Diseases of the Pancreas. Karger, Basel.)

watery mucus. After the initial vomiting, the dog might
show regurgitant movements only because of nausea. Its
attitude will vary from mild to marked depression, and
its posture will either be normal, upright with abdominal
tucking, or lateral recumbency depending on the degree
of pain and hypovolemia (Figures 10.24–10.28). Diarrhea
might occasionally occur, but scant or absent feces is more
common due to the peritonitis-induced ileus.
The age of cats affected with acute pancreatitis can
range from young to old, although in one study the
­majority of the cats were older than 8 years. Many have
normal body weight. The clinical signs are similar to
those in the dog, although vomiting might be occasionally absent and the clinical presentation much more
­subtle (Figures 10.29, 10.30).
The physical examination findings vary with the
severity of the problem. Dogs and cats with mild pancreatitis might only show mild mental depression, normal
vital signs, and equivocal palpable abdominal tenderness. Signs associated with the hemorrhagic necrotic
form include: marked mental depression; fever; hypotension with accompanying tachypnea, tachycardia, and
weak femoral pulse; a painful abdomen; and a moderate to marked degree of dehydration. Abdominal palpation in the cat can sometimes detect bowel adhesions
(Figure 10.31). One retrospective study involving 40 cats
reported the most common signs being severe lethargy,
anorexia, and dehydration. Histopathology identified

K22463_C010.indd 367

10.24

10.25

Figures 10.24, 10.25 This 5-year-old male Dobermann displays
an abnormal posture from abdominal pain caused by acute
pancreatitis. After 3 days of treatment the dog was pain free
and its posture was normal.

23/04/16 1:35 pm

368

Diseases of specific organ systems

10.26

10.28

Figure 10.26 The clinical signs of acute pancreatitis can vary
from mild to marked. This 13-year-old female Poodle had
acute vomiting, mental depression, and marked abdominal
pain peracutely immediately after dinner. Despite the use of
intensive fluid therapy, the dog died from hemorrhagic necrotic
pancreatitis.

10.27

Figure 10.28 Severe hemorrhagic pancreatic necrosis (arrow) in
the postmortem examination of the dog shown in Figure 10.26.

Figure 10.27 Postmortem examination of the dog in
Figure 10.26. Shown here are calcium soap deposits
(arrowheads) on the abdominal fat and pancreatic ascites.

acute necrotizing pancreatitis and acute pancreatic
necrosis as the two main types.
Clinically detectable icterus will not occur initially
with pancreatitis, but it might be evident by the third day
and usually results from cholestasis; bile duct obstruction occurs rarely. Abdominal distension can result from
paralytic ileus. A reddish-brown colored ascitic fluid
(pancreatic ascites) can sometimes accumulate with hemorrhagic necrotic pancreatitis. A guarded to grave prognosis should always be given to pancreatitis patients that
assume a lateral recumbent posture and have mental
dullness, oliguria/anuria, and hypotension that is resistant to treatment. A more detailed and practical severity
scoring system is provided in Table 10.3.

K22463_C010.indd 368

10.29

Figure 10.29 Pancreatitis in cats is typically accompanied by
anorexia, mental depression, and marked inactivity. Although
many cats will vomit, there are those who will not. Most cats
with pancreatitis will show abdominal tenderness and varying
degrees of radiographic pathology. A definitive diagnosis can
only be obtained by visualizing the pancreas grossly with or
without biopsy and histopathology.

23/04/16 1:35 pm

Pancreatic disorders

369

10.30

10.31

Figure 10.30 Lateral abdominal radiograph of the cat in Figure
10.29, which presented with acute pancreatitis, showing a
diffuse abdominal effusion and a ‘gathering effect’ of the small
bowel. These lesions were evident at surgery (see Figure 10.31).
The abundant amount of retroperitoneal fat causes ventral
depression of the descending colon.

Figure 10.31 This surgical view of a 16-year-old female
Domestic Shorthair cat shows small bowel adhesions, which
were detectable on abdominal palpation. Also shown are
diffuse calcium soap deposits on the parietal and visceral
peritoneal surfaces. These deposits are pathognomonic of acute
pancreatitis.

Table 10.3 Practical severity scoring in dogs.
Disease
severity

Score*

Prognosis

Clinical presentation and typical therapy

Mild

0

Excellent

Often resolves spontaneously. Recovery is uncomplicated. Managed as an outpatient, if
hydration status is good. Intravenous fluids can be given if necessary. Pancreatic rest (no
food for 1–2 days if vomiting or nauseous) and/or pain control is usually all that is required.
Maropitant will help the vomiting and nausea

Moderate

1

Good to fair

Usually dehydrated – the renal system is most often compromised (prerenal azotemia).
Treatment involves the administration of crystalloids at twice the maintenance rate
together with electrolytes. Nothing by mouth until vomiting stops, with analgesia and
maropitant as appropriate. Recovery is usually uncomplicated provided adequate fluid therapy is given. If anorexia lasts for more than 2 days, consider additional nutritional support

2

Fair to poor

Dehydrated, hypovolemic, often prerenal azotemia and degenerative left shift leukocytosis.
Animals usually recover with intensive therapy, but may have to be euthanized for ­financial
reasons. Intravenous crystalloids (initially administered as per treatment for shock)
followed by colloids, with or without plasma, in many cases. Monitor urine output, renal
function, and lung sounds. Control pain and consider special nutritional support. Monitor
coagulation status carefully and intervene early with fresh frozen plasma and heparin, if
necessary. May need referral if there is a poor response to initial therapy

3

Poor

Extensive therapy and life support is required with constant monitoring. Early referral is
advised. Surgical intervention and peritoneal lavage may be necessary. Ventilatory ­support,
central venous pressure monitoring, and high volume fluid therapy are usually needed.
Jejunostomy feeding or total parenteral nutrition is often required. Most patients die
and euthanasia may have to be considered. The pathology in these patients can include
extensive pancreatic necrosis, pancreatic abscess, phlegmon formation, and macroscopic
vascular compromise caused by regional infarction

4

Grave

Severe

Modified from Ruaux and Atwell (1998) and Ruaux (2000).
*The severity scoring system is based on the number of organ systems, apart from the pancreas, that show evidence of failure or
compromise at initial presentation.

K22463_C010.indd 369

23/04/16 1:35 pm

370

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 10.4 Differential diagnosis of acute pancreatitis in the
dog and cat.

10.32

Acute gastroenteritis
Intoxications
Blunt abdominal trauma
Gastrointestinal obstruction
Gastrointestinal perforation
Intestinal volvulus
Intestinal ischemia and infarction
Emphysematous cholecystitis
Ruptured organs (e.g. uterus, urinary bladder, gallbladder)
Acute kidney injury
Acute hepatopathy
10.33

Differential diagnosis
The initial differential diagnosis of acute pancreatitis
includes a variety of clinical disorders (Table 10.4). The
list is extensive because the signs mimic any number of
acute abdominal syndromes. Several are surgical emergencies that require rapid diagnosis and treatment.

Diagnosis
Imaging findings
The two most commonly used modalities are radiology and ultrasonography. Abdominal radiographs of
dogs and cats with acute pancreatitis can show several
abnormalities. In the mild edematous form the findings can range from normal to mild ileus involving
the stomach and duodenum. The more severe forms
cause the ­following changes as a result of the peritonitis: increased fluid d
­ ensity with loss of visceral detail in
the anterior abdomen, right-sided lateral displacement
of a gas-distended duodenum, and gastric distension
(Figures 10.32–10.34). In the dog, visualization of the
right kidney becomes apparent on the ventral dorsal projection of the abdominal radiograph (Figures 10.35a, b,
10.36). This finding has been demonstrated in many
dogs in the author’s experience and the results corroborated at surgery or at necropsy. The exact mechanism for
this phenomenum has not been thoroughly explained,
but local adhesions associated with the regional peritonitis might be major factors. In addition to these classic
findings, acute pancreatitis can also cause radiographically demonstrable pleural effusion and pulmonary fluid
accumulations, as shown in the pathologic illustrations
(see Figures 10.9, 10.10). In the most advanced stages of
this disease, the acute respiratory distress syndrome can
occur as a result of the systemic inflammatory response
syndrome. The outcome associated with this syndrome is
usually ominous (Figures 10.37a–c). In cats, pleural and
pericardial effusions have been described.

K22463_C010.indd 370

Figures 10.32, 10.33 Lateral and ventrodorsal abdominal
radiographs of a dog illustrating several abnormalities
indicative of acute pancreatitis. The lateral projection shows
a loss of detail in the anterior mid abdomen and an increased
fluid density in the anterior abdomen just caudal to the
liver (arrow). The ventrodorsal view shows an increased right
upper abdominal fluid density along with duodenal ileus and
lateralization (arrow).

Ultrasonography is very useful in detecting pathology
associated with pancreatitis in the dog and cat. While
the normal pancreas is seldom visualized, the inflamed
organ in the dog acquires an increased hypoechogenicity.

23/04/16 1:35 pm

Pancreatic disorders

10.34

Figure 10.34 Lateral thoracic radiograph from an adult
Labrador Retriever showing a pleural effusion as well as
pulmonary infiltrate. The dog had hemorrhagic necrotic
pancreatitis and secondary acute respiratory distress syndrome.

371

10.35

a

In the presence of peripancreatic fat inflammation, the
perimeter of the pancreas becomes hyperechogenic.
Additional findings in the dog include pancreatic enlargement and irregularity, peritoneal effusion, and evidence
of extrahepatic biliary obstruction. Inflammation of the
right pancreatic limb can cause the duodenum to appear
thickened. One study describing the ultrasonographic
findings of acute pancreatitis in cats included hypoechogenic pancreas, hyperechoic peripancreatic mesentery,
peritoneal effusion, pancreatic enlargement, hyperechoic
hepatomegaly, and mixed pancreatic hypo- and hyperechogenicity. Pancreatic anechoic pseudocyst and abscess
formation and pancreatic ascites can also be detected
with ultrasonography (Figures 10.38, 10.39, 10.40a–d).
Overlying distended bowel loops are the major limitation
to this imaging technique, but in most instances abdominal ultrasonography is a helpful diagnostic modality
(Figures 10.41–10.44).

Clinicopathologic findings
The characteristic laboratory test abnormalities of acute
pancreatitis in dogs and cats have been described. These
are listed in Table 10.5 and illustrated in Figure 10.45. In
cats the serum biochemical profile is variable, ranging from
normal to abnormalities involving renal, liver, ­glucose,
protein, and electrolyte parameters. The hemogram often
indicates an inflammatory response. One study of 46 cats
with pancreatitis suggests that low plasma ionized calcium
concentration is common and is associated with a guarded
to grave prognosis, especially when ­ionized calcium concentrations are ≤1.0 mmol/l (4.0 mg/dl).
Choosing between amylase or lipase as a diagnostic
test has been a subject of controversy for several years,

K22463_C010.indd 371

b
Figures 10.35a, b Lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs of a
dog with acute pancreatitis showing a summation soft tissue
fluid effect in the cranial abdomen on the lateral view. The
ventrodorsal view clearly shows the right kidney.

because both enzyme levels can be normal or elevated
from other conditions despite the ­presence of acute pancreatitis, thus causing them to lack both ­sensitivity and
specificity. Increases in serum amylase levels to 3–5 times
normal are strongly suspicious of acute pancreatitis in
the appropriate clinical setting.

23/04/16 1:35 pm

372

Diseases of specific organ systems

10.36

10.37

a
Figure 10.36 Ventrodorsal radiograph of another dog with
acute pancreatitis showing a highly visible right kidney
outline (arrow).

Serum lipase level has been reported to be more reliable than amylase for diagnosing acute pancreatitis in the
dog. However, lipase as well as amylase may be elevated
in patients with serious abdominal illnesses such as hepatopathies and renal and neoplastic disease. Serum amylase and lipase activities can be normal or even decreased
despite the presence of serious pancreatic damage because
of rapid renal clearance and diminished quantity after the
initial elevation. The interpretation of serum amylase and
lipase results should always be made solely within the context of the patient’s other ongoing clinical findings.
In feline pancreatitis the appearance of ­abnormally
elevated serum amylase and lipase levels is ­typically
variable and should never be the sole criteria for
­
diagnosis. Normal levels of both enzymes commonly
­
occur in the cat despite the presence of acute pancreatitis.
A two-fold or more increase in serum amylase and lipase
activity in the presence of normal renal function is suggestive of acute pancreatitis when used with other supportive clinical findings.
When the feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI)
concentration test first became available, there was a false
dependence on its supposed accuracy. It is no longer recommended as a diagnostic test for acute pancreatitis in cats.
In dogs the canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
(PLI) test is supposed to be fairly sensitive for diagnosing
acute pancreatitis. The diagnostic cut-off value is 200 µg/l.
This test can now be done in-house with a commercially
available kit in addition to it being done in commercial
laboratories. A recent (2012) multi-institutional study
evaluating the canine pancreatic lipase immunoassay
and the point of care (SNAP®) assay, showed that the tests

K22463_C010.indd 372

b

c
Figures 10.37a–c Thoracic radiographic images (a, b) from a dog
that has severe acute pancreatitis with a pancreatic abscess. The
dog acquired acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and
was eventually euthanized. The radiographs, taken during the
final days, show diffuse pulmonary infiltrate and some pleural
effusion. The lungs as seen at necropsy (c) were consolidated and
the histopathology features confirmed ARDS.

23/04/16 1:35 pm

Pancreatic disorders

10.38

373

in the dog and cat and that the newly ­
available PLI
tests are simply another diagnostic tool that can help
lead to a diagnosis. The gold standard test for diagnosing acute pancreatitis in veterinary patients is gross
observation of the pancreas with or without biopsy and
histopathology.

Management
Medical therapy

10.39

Figures 10.38, 10.39 Abdominal ultrasonograms from a
5-year-old male Irish Setter taken 2 weeks after a bout of
acute pancreatitis. (10.38) General orientation of the dog’s
upper abdomen showing an anechoic area in the pancreas.
(10.39) More detailed view of the pancreatic cavitation. The
transabdominal fine needle aspiration yielded a dark colored
fluid that was composed of sterile amorphous debris. All
of the ‘cystic’ fluid was removed by aspiration and the dog
recovered well.

have higher sensitivities and specificities than the serum
amylase and lipase tests. However false-positive test
results are still possible with both of these tests and their
results should be interpreted along with other diagnostic
modalities such as imaging.
There is also a feline PLI test that adds to the clinician’s
diagnostic acumen for acute pancreatitis in the cat. This
feline pancreatic lipase test (fPLI) has been shown to have
greater diagnostic accuracy than the feline TLI test. The
same caution regarding interpretation of this test in the
dog should be used when using this test in the cat. It is
essential to realize that there is no one laboratory test
that is 100% accurate in diagnosing acute pancreatitis

K22463_C010.indd 373

Therapy entails the restriction of oral intake (nothing by
mouth) if the animal is vomiting profusely, while providing fluid and electrolyte needs by parenteral means. The
steps listed in Table 10.6 provide guidelines for treating
the more severe form of pancreatitis.
Patients who have suspicious yet mild historical and
physical signs with unremarkable laboratory test results
can often be treated conservatively with small feedings
for 1–2 days, if they will eat voluntarily, and periodic
offerings of water.
Esophageal, gastric, or jejunal feeding tubes can be
placed early in the course of treatment and low-volume
frequent feedings can be given through the tubes.
Initially, the most important component of treatment
of severe pancreatitis is the provision of adequate parenteral fluids. Marked hypotension in the dog should
be treated with rapid volume expansion with lactated
or acetated Ringer’s at an initial dosage of 20 ml/kg (for
cats give 7–10 ml/kg) over the first 15 minutes of treatment and repeated at 15-minute intervals until the blood
pressure is normalized. Normal saline (0.9%) is no longer
a preferred fluid because of its tendency to cause hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Saline will be indicated if
the patient is hyponatremic. Close patient monitoring is
essential in order to prevent intravascular fluid overload.
This can be done crudely by observing breathing quality and listening to lung sounds. After the vital signs are
stabilized and urine output is noted as adequate, a maintenance fluid rate of 60–120 ml/kg can be given gradually over the remaining 20–22-hour period. The amount
of maintenance fluid depends on the patient’s vasomotor
stability, the degree of abdominal effusion accumulation (‘third spacing’), and the presence of ongoing losses
through vomiting and diarrhea. The intravenous maintenance solution can consist of 2.5–5% dextrose in 0.45%
saline solution supplemented with potassium chloride
(3–5 mmol/kg/day [3–5 mEq/kg/day]) and soluble vitamin B complex. Any acid–base abnormalities should be
recognized and treated appropriately. Severely hypoproteinemic animals (serum albumin <20 g/l [2.0 g/dl])
should receive fresh plasma (5–20 ml/kg per day IV). This
will temporarily increase the plasma oncotic pressure

23/04/16 1:35 pm

374

Diseases of specific organ systems

10.40

b

a

c
Figures 10.40a–d Images of a large pancreatic pseudocyst in a
dog showing its ultrasonographic appearance, the cyst contents
from a fine needle aspiration procedure, and the cyst at surgery
(intact and after resection).

d

10.41

Figure 10.41 Abdominal ultrasound examination of a 7-yearold male English Cocker Spaniel showing lesions typical of
acute pancreatitis, including hypoechogenicity of the pancreatic
parenchyma (arrowhead) and prominent hyperechogenicity of
the inflamed peripancreatic fat, which contained ample calcium
soap deposits (arrow). This dog was also in an addisonian
crisis. He became anuric and was subsequently euthanized. The
postmortem findings included acute necrotizing pancreatitis
(similar to that shown in Figure 10.27), bilateral adrenocortical
atrophy, and thyroid atrophy. It was thought that the untreated
hypothyroidism caused hyperlipidemia, which could have
predisposed the dog to acute pancreatitis. The adrenal
and thyroid conditions could have been associated with an
autoimmune polyhypoendocrinopathy condition.

K22463_C010.indd 374

23/04/16 1:35 pm

Pancreatic disorders

10.42

375

10.43

Figures 10.42, 10.43 Histopathology of the pancreas of the dog in Figure 10.36 showing glandular necrosis, hemorrhage, edema,
and inflammatory infiltrate consisting of neutrophils and macrophages. (H&E) (Courtesy P. Ginn)
10.44

Figure 10.44 Cats can also have typical ultrasonographic
signs of acute pancreatitis, as evidenced by the parenchymal
hypoechogenicity and a ‘rim’ of hyperechogenicity (arrow).
This 7-year-old male cat was also a ketoacidotic diabetic
who gradually improved with 3 weeks of intensive medical
treatment alone. He eventually became cured of both diseases.

and help prevent edema formation, pleural effusion, pulmonary edema, and renal failure. Note that the actual
volume of plasma needed and the usual prohibitive cost
per unit will usually limit the actual amounts administered. Plasma (10 ml/kg IV over a 3–6-hour period) is also
a source of pancreatic protease inhibitors, but studies in
humans have shown no clinical benefit from this antiprotease activity in transfused plasma. Other colloidal
solutions, such as hydroxyethyl starch (20 ml/kg IV over

K22463_C010.indd 375

24 hours) or dextrans (10–20 ml/kg IV over 24 hours), were
formerly used as plasma substitutes, but they are no longer recommended because of the potential complications
they can cause in the patient (acute kidney injury and
bleeding, respectively).
Urine output should be closely monitored after the volume of the patient’s plasma space is adequately expanded.
Oliguria or anuria should prompt a furosemide-induced
diuresis after rehydration is completed, even though
it will not reverse acute kidney injury. Potassium supplementation should be discontinued if hyperkalemia
develops. The induction of osmotic diuresis should be
avoided if the animal’s plasma is already hyperosmotic
(usually from hyperglycemia). During oliguria the maintenance parenteral fluid volumes should be equal to the
volume of urine produced plus any insensible fluid losses
(10–15 ml/kg/day). During anuria any unsuccessful forced
IV fluid diuresis attempts can cause potentially fatal pulmonary edema.
Drugs used to treat gastrointestinal disorders (e.g.
atropine and propantheline) were commonly used in
the past to help stop vomiting. However, their adverse
parasympatholytic side-effects often exceeded any
­
­benefits. The current recommendation is to administer
­maropitant (1.0 mg/kg SC), which functions as a neurokinin (NK1) receptor antagonist antiemetic. If vomiting
persists, metoclopramide can be used without the parasympatholytic effects of the early-generation antiemetics.
The recommended dosage is 0.2–0.4 mg/kg SC q6–8h or
1 mg/kg/q24h by continuous IV infusion. Ondansetron
is a centrally acting antiemetic that can be given to dogs
and cats at a dosage of 0.15 mg/kg IV over a 6–12-hour
period and repeated every 6–12 hours.
Famotidine, an H2 blocker, and gastric acid
inhibitors, such as the proton pump blockers
­

23/04/16 1:35 pm

376

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 10.5 Clinicopathologic abnormalities accompanying acute pancreatitis in the dog and cat.
Abnormality

Proposed mechanism(s)

Leukocytosis

Inflammation, stress, hemoconcentration, secondary infection

Leukopenia

Mobilization to inflamed site, bone marrow suppression from endotoxemia

Hemoconcentration

Dehydration, translocation of plasma into abdominal cavity

Hypoalbuminemia

Intestinal loss, translocation into the abdominal cavity and peripancreatic tissues

Thrombocytopenia

Consumption from thrombus formation

Anemia

Hemorrhagic abdominal effusion, iatrogenic crystalloid fluid infusion

Azotemia

Prerenal from dehydration, renal from hypovolemia or disseminated
­intravascular coagulation, idiopathic renal failure

Liver enzyme and bilirubin elevations

Focal hepatic necrosis, hepatic lipidosis, cholangitis, cholangiostasis

Hyperglycemia

Elevated ‘stress’ hormones (growth hormone, glucocorticoids, glucagon,
­epinephrine), hypoinsulinemia, destruction of islet β-cells

Hypoglycemia

Sepsis with impaired gluconeogenesis

Hypocalcemia

Calcium soap formation is most widely accepted mechanism

Hyperlipidemia

Might pre-exist as separate entity; can occur with pancreatitis, but exact
­mechanism unknown, possibly related to ‘stress’ hormone release

Hypernatremia

Dehydration

Hyponatremia

Vomiting, pseudohyponatremia from hyperlipidemia

Hypokalemia

Vomiting, failure to supplement parenteral fluids, osmotic diuresis from
hyperglycemia

Hyperamylasemia and hyperlipasemia

Direct venous absorption of enzymes from the inflamed pancreas and absorption
via transperitoneal lymphatics, and lymphatic drainage from the pancreas and
peripancreatic tissues

Prolonged prothrombin and partial
thromboplastin times, hypofibrinogenemia,
thrombocytopenia

Disseminated intravascular coagulation

Glucose
BUN
Creatinine
Cholesterol
Total bilirubin
Total protein
Albumin
AP
Calcium
Phosphorus
AST
ALT
Globulin
Chloride
Sodium
Potassium
Total CO2
Amylase
Lipase
Osmolality

K22463_C010.indd 376

48.6 mmol/l (884 mg/dl)
35.7 mmol/l (100 mg/dl)
424 µmol/l (4.8 mg/dl)
7.8 mmol/l (300 mg/dl)
61.5 µmol/l (3.6 mg/dl)
74 g/l (7.4 g/dl)
26 g/l (2.6 g/dl)
492 U/l
2.2 mmol/l (8.8 mg/dl)
1.5 mmol/l (4.7 mg/dl)
110 U/l
46 U/l
48 g/l (4.8 g/dl)
103 mmol/l (103 mEq/l)
130 mmol/l (130 mEq/l)
4.4 mmol/l (4.4 mEq/l)
12 mmol/l (12 mEq/l)
3,000 U/l
2.0 U/l
360 mOsmol/kg

10.45

Figure 10.45 Example of marked serum biochemical abnormalities taken
from the dog in Figure 10.3. These results support the additional clinical
diagnoses of hyperosmolar diabetic ketoacidosis and acute kidney injury. The
serum amylase and lipase exceeded the upper limits of normal by two-fold,
thus supporting the main clinical diagnosis of acute pancreatitis. The lowered
serum calcium level is attributed to calcium soap formation. The elevated
liver enzymes are likely due to hepatic lipidosis and cholangiostasis, while
the hyponatremia could have been due to losses from impaired renal tubular
sodium reabsorption, osmotic diuresis, and vomiting. Pseudohyponatremia
could have also been present from hyperlipidemia or marked hyperglycemia.
The low total CO2 reflects metabolic acidosis, and the hyperosmolality is due
to the marked hyperglycemia.

23/04/16 1:35 pm

Pancreatic disorders

Table 10.6 Basic principles for treating severe pancreatitis in
the dog.
Admit to intensive care and insert an indwelling ­intravenous
catheter
Nothing by mouth if vomiting is profuse
Small amounts of oral nutrition can be given in the absence
of severe vomiting
Pain relief
Antibiotics
Parenteral fluid replacement
Insulin (where appropriate)
Nutrition support eventually by total parenteral nutrition
or enteral nutrition using jejunostomy tube if oral intake is
not possible
Surgical débridement and drainage – if infected or not
responsive to medical treatment

omeprazole (0.5–1.0 mg/kg q24h) and pantoprazole
(0.7–1.0 mg/kg IV over 15 minutes q24h) have been
­recommended because of their effective anti-ulcer effects.
Although there are theoretical justifications for their use,
there are no well-controlled clinical trials that substantiate
any proven benefit in the treatment of acute pancreatitis.
Antibiotics are usually reserved for moderately and
severely ill patients. Such animals are prone to various
complications including septicemia, urinary tract infection (especially when an indwelling urethral catheter
is used), pneumonia, and pancreatic abscess formation.
Since some of these infections are polymicrobial, broad-­
spectrum antimicrobial coverage for both aerobic and
anaerobic bacteria is recommended. Bacterial ­infection
of the pancreas can be due to the spread of bacteria from
the portal lymph nodes, b
­ iliary tree, colon, or from other
body sites. Ampicillin, quinolones, and first-­generation
cephalosporin antimicrobials can be used safely.
Aminoglycoside antibiotics should be used with caution
due to their potential nephrotoxicity in a clinical setting
where renal function might already be impaired. The literature currently does not recommend antimicrobial use
in the absence of a documented infection.
Glucocorticoids are not routinely used in acute pancreatitis. Although they might be helpful because of
their anti-inflammatory activity, they can predispose the
patient to infections that can be very detrimental.
Providing adequate nourishment is essential. Although
5% dextrose solution provides the small amount of calories that might suffice for the first few days of treatment,
it falls far short of providing the patient’s caloric and
protein needs over the 1–2-week period of inappetence
caused by the animal’s abdominal discomfort and persistent vomiting. Many patients will be able to resume the
intake of liquids and then solids after the first 5–7 days

K22463_C010.indd 377

377

following cessation of vomiting. A low-fat diet is recommended during this recovery period and for the long term
thereafter. In cats, the introduction of food is also gradual,
but without any apparent need for fat restriction.
Intravenous parenteral nutrition or enteral tube feeding should be considered if the patient will not voluntarily eat. The former is somewhat controversial because
there is evidence that intravenous infusion of amino
acid and lipid solutions can stimulate pancreatic secretion in the dog. Problems associated with intravenous
hyperalimentation include catheter-associated phlebitis
and septicemia and plasma hyperosmolarity. Meticulous
preparation is required. There is a need for multiple cannulae, and expense must be taken into consideration.
Intravenous hyperalimentation is therefore usually
reserved for tertiary medical facilities where the logistics are conducive to this particular treatment modality.
Enteral tube feeding is an alternative way of nourishing
an animal that has protracted acute pancreatitis. J-tube
feeding is the preferred choice for extended nutritional
support in postoperative patients because of its ease of
maintenance and the advantages it provides to the small
bowel mucosa.
Analgesic treatment using opioids should be reserved
for animals that have severe and intractable pain.
Phenothiazine drugs are contraindicated initially
because they might worsen hypotension (see Table 10.7
for specific drugs and dosages). Epidural analgesia can
also be used for pain control (Figures 10.46, 10.47).
Table 10.7 Analgesia for the dog and cat with acute
pancreatitis.
Species

Drug

Dose

Small dogs and
cats

Fentanyl
transdermal

25 µg/hour

Dogs 5–10 kg

Fentanyl
transdermal

25 µg/hour

Dogs 10–20 kg

Fentanyl
transdermal

50 µg/hour

Dogs 20–30 kg

Fentanyl
transdermal

75 µg/hour

Dogs >30 kg

Fentanyl
transdermal

100 µg/hour

Cats and dogs

Butorphanol

0.1–1.0 mg/kg IM, IV,
or SC q1–3h

Cats and dogs

Buprenorphine

0.01–0.02 mg/kg IM,
IV, or SC q6–12h

23/04/16 1:35 pm

378

Diseases of specific organ systems

10.46

10.47

10.48

Figure 10.48 One of the indications for surgery in acute
pancreatitis patients is the formation of pancreatic phlegmon
and the onset of secondary bacterial infection. This cytology
sample, from abdominal fluid in a dog with marked pancreatic
necrosis with phlegmon and abscess formation, shows toxic
neutrophils containing bacteria as well as free bacteria (arrows).
Gram-negative bacteria are the most common organisms
present on culture if infection occurs. (Courtesy D.J. Meyer)
10.49

Figures 10.46, 10.47 This 5-year-old male Labrador Retriever
was referred to surgery because of severe hemorrhagic
pancreatitis. He required critical care, which included epidural
analgesia, intensive patient monitoring, and the need for
multiple intravenous and intra-arterial cannula sites. The dog
died despite all the intensive care provided.

Insulin treatment is indicated when the blood glucose
level exceeds 16.7 mmol/l (300 mg/dl). Regular crystalline
zinc insulin (initial SC injection of 0.5 U/kg body weight)
is preferred because of its short duration of action, especially if the hyperglycemia is transient. If the patient
shows a continued need for insulin, it should be managed
according to current protocol. Regular insulin should be
given by slow constant IV infusion (0.05–0.1 U/kg/hour) if
the patient is hypotensive, during which time subcutaneous absorption is impaired and undependable.

Surgical therapy
There are several major indications for surgery in
patients with acute pancreatitis: to treat potentially correctable disease such as pancreatic pseudocyst or abscess;
to eliminate diseases initiating pancreatic inflammation;
to remove necrotic or infected foci during the septic phase
of hemorrhagic necrotizing pancreatitis; and to correct
complicating problems such as bile duct obstruction

K22463_C010.indd 378

Figure 10.49 Surgery for pancreatitis in a 3-year-old female
Schnauzer that was refractory to medical therapy alone.
Shown here is peritonitis and an isolated mesenteric abscess
containing drains that were surgically implanted and remained
in place for 3 days postoperatively. This dog required two
separate surgical procedures for débridement and drainage.
She required intensive care for 5 weeks and went on to do well.

(Figures 10.48–10.53). Laparotomy also allows for the
insertion of a J-tube and the commencement of enteral
feeding. Although some might prefer earlier surgical
intervention, the current recommendation in human
medicine calls for delays of as long as 2 weeks in order
to allow time for diffuse inflammation to subside and for
any pancreatic abscess or pseudocyst to assume the form
of a discrete mass.
Laparotomy and peritoneal lavage are recommended
for moderately to severely sick animals that fail to

23/04/16 1:35 pm

Pancreatic disorders

379

10.50

10.53

Figure 10.50 Surgery on a 10-year-old Yorkshire Terrier
showing caseous debris (arrow) and peritonitis associated with
acute hemorrhagic necrotic pancreatitis. Débridement and
abdominal drains were used to treat this dog.

Figure 10.53 Acute pancreatitis in cats can cause similar
pathology to that seen in dogs. Shown here is a phlegmon with
cavitation that was found during an abdominal ultrasound
examination preoperatively. Abdominal drains were inserted
after the necrotic debris was removed. This 6-year-old male
Siamese cat required two abdominal surgeries before recovery
was attainable.

10.51

Figure 10.51 This 7-year-old male Wirehaired Fox Terrier had
hemorrhagic pancreatitis that could barely be identified at
surgery among the inflamed abdominal tissues. Shown is a
large abscess cavity (arrow) that was located at the root of the
mesentery.

10.52

respond to medical treatment after the first 5–7 days or for
those in the early stages of severe hemorrhagic necrotic
pancreatitis. In many of these cases, the optimal time for
surgery is left to the discretion of the clinician. Cases of
infected pancreatitis should also be treated surgically as
soon as possible, much in the same light as a septic abdomen would be treated. This condition is frequently associated with a guarded to grave prognosis. The diagnosis of
infected pancreatitis is made by the cytologic demonstration of bacteria obtained from abdominal fluid or tissue
via ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration or through
surgical exploration. Microbial isolation for identification
and sensitivity should also be done, ideally prior to antibiotic administration. Lavage-induced hypoproteinemia
and serum electrolyte deficiencies should be corrected
with plasma and appropriately adjusted electrolyte solutions, respectively.

Complications and long-term management

Figure 10.52 The cavity shown in Figure 10.51 contained a
remarkable amount of pus from which E. coli was isolated.

K22463_C010.indd 379

Table 10.8 outlines the several complications that can occur
during the acute or chronic (beyond 2 weeks) phase of
pancreatitis. Long-term medical management for the dog
includes a low-fat diet that is divided into two or three
feedings per day. Diabetes mellitus and exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency (EPI) should be treated according to established protocols. The diabetic condition can be either temporary or permanent and is the result of substantial beta-cell
destruction (70–90%) as a result of the pancreatitis.

23/04/16 1:35 pm

380

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 10.8 Complications of acute or chronic pancreatitis.
Complication

Phase of disease

Diabetes mellitus

Acute or chronic

Pancreatic abscess and
pseudocyst

Acute

Bowel infarction

Acute

Bowel obstruction

Acute

Bile duct obstruction and/or
cholangiostasis

Acute

Renal failure

Acute

Septicemia

Acute

Consumption coagulopathy

Acute

Pulmonary edema (acute
respiratory distress
syndrome)

Acute

Pleural effusion

Acute

Relapsing pancreatitis

Chronic

Pancreatic exocrine
insufficiency

Chronic

10.54

Figure 10.54 Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency is rare in the
cat. This emaciated 13-year-old female Domestic Shorthair cat
showed typical signs of weight loss and polyphagia in the absence
of hyperthyroidism.
10.55

Note: ‘Acute’ refers to first 14 days; ‘chronic’ extends beyond
14 days.

EXOCRINE PANCREATIC INSUFFICIENCY
Definition/overview
EPI is a malnutrition disorder caused by a deficiency of
pancreatic digestive enzymes. It is much more common
in dogs than in cats.

Figure 10.55 The fibrotic and atrophic pancreas of the cat in
Figure 10.54 was evident at laparotomy.
10.56

Etiology
In the dog, where it is most commonly seen in German
Shepherd Dogs and Rough-coated Collies, EPI is usually
caused by an atrophy of the zymogen-containing acinar cells. The atrophy was once thought to be idiopathic,
but recent studies show that an immune-­
mediated
lymphocytic inflammatory process leads to the atro­
phy in the aforementioned breeds. The typical age of
onset is between 1 and 5 years. EPI can also be caused
by ­recurrent pancreatitis and the associated loss of acinar cells. It rarely occurs with pancreatic adenocarcinoma because the malignancy will often lead to the
patient’s demise long before it destroys the majority of
the exocrine ­pancreatic cells. EPI occurs rarely in cats
(Figures 10.54–10.56), where the signs are similar to those
in the dog; chronic pancreatitis is thought to be the cause.

K22463_C010.indd 380

Figure 10.56 The cat in Figure 10.54 after treatment with
pancreatic enzyme replacement.

Pathophysiology
A lack of digestive enzymes resulting in poor intraluminal digestion is the main cause of the malabsorption in
this syndrome. This is furthered by changes in the small
intestinal mucosa including abnormal intestinal enzyme

23/04/16 1:35 pm

Pancreatic disorders

activity, impaired transport function, villous atrophy,
and inflammatory cell infiltration. Bacterial overgrowth
is a frequent complication of EPI and may contribute to
some of the pathology.

381

very foul odor. In cats, EPI must be differentiated from
­hyperthyroidism, and the physical examination should

10.57

Clinical presentation
The classic signs include polyphagia, weight loss, and
hyperdefecation. Pica and coprophagia, flatulence, and
borborygmus can also occur. The stool quality ranges
from diarrhea to semi-formed, while the color varies
from brown to yellow (Figure 10.57). Polydipsia and polyuria can be present if diabetes mellitus coexists.
EPI patients are typically thin and have dull dry
haircoats reflecting their chronic malnourished condition (Figures 10.58–10.60). Examination of the stool
and, sometimes, the perineum often shows a greasy
texture caused by steatorrhea. The feces can give off a

Figure 10.57 Fecal sample from a dog with exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency and steatorrhea showing the typical yellow color
and greasy texture.

10.58

10.59

Figures 10.58, 10.59 A 10-month-old male German Shepherd Dog showing its frail body and stunted growth (10.58) and its
voracious appetite (10.59).

10.60

a

b

Figures 10.60a, b This young female Dachshund suffered severe emaciation from exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. The same dog is
shown approximately 4 months after pancreatic enzyme replacement treatment.

K22463_C010.indd 381

23/04/16 1:35 pm

382

Diseases of specific organ systems

include a thorough palpation of the neck in search of goiters, which will lend support to this diagnosis.

Differential diagnosis
Small intestinal malabsorption, pancreatic duct obstruction, primary small intestinal disease, parasitism,
hyperthyroidism.

Diagnosis
The hemogram will be normal or show a mild normochromic normocytic anemia from the malnutrition.
Serum chemistry levels are usually normal; however,
hypoproteinemia can occur in some patients as a result
of the faulty digestion and impaired assimilation of
ingested proteins. Hyperglycemia can occur if most of
the p
­ ancreatic beta cells have been destroyed by earlier
pancreatitis.
Examination of feces for the presence of fat, carbohydrate, and trypsin activity (film digestion) is an
empirical test and frequently yields inaccurate results
(Figures 10.61, 10.62). However, a fecal proteolytic
enzyme test has been found to be useful in cats. The
serum TLI assay is a sensitive and accurate quantitative test for diagnosing EPI in the dog and cat. A value
of <2.5 µg/l is diagnostic. In German Shepherd Dogs and
Rough-coated Collies, serum TLI values ranging between
2.5 and 5 µg/l suggests subclinical EPI and partial atrophy.

Management
Once the diagnosis is made, treatment is simple, entailing the provision of a powdered ox- or pig-derived
commercial pancreatic enzyme product. The powdered form is preferred over tablets. It should be thoroughly mixed in a moist, nutritionally balanced ration
(one teaspoonful per 0.5 kg of food) at each feeding.
Providing a balanced ­vitamin–mineral tablet will also

be helpful. Some dogs with coexisting intestinal bacterial o
­vergrowth will require antimicrobial treatment
­(tetracycline, 15 mg/kg q8h) in order to enhance the effectiveness of t­reatment. Gradually increased amounts of
food should be ­provided until the patient’s normal body
weight is reached.
The outlook for the majority of these patients is excellent so long as they are maintained on their required
amount of pancreatic enzyme therapy (Figure 10.63).
In most cases, where regeneration of pancreatic exocrine tissue rarely occurs, treatment will be life-long
(Figures 10.64, 10.65). Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus might also require life-long insulin treatment if the
EPI is the result of acute pancreatitis.

10.62

Figure 10.62 Lugol solution will stain starch a dark purple
color, as shown on this microscopic view of a stool smear taken
from a dog with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (×100).

10.63

10.61

Figure 10.61 A microscopic view of steatorrheic stool stained
with Oil Red O showing the large sized red-colored fat globules
reflecting undigested fat (×100).

K22463_C010.indd 382

Figure 10.63 The dog in Figures 10.58 and 10.59 after 4
months of treatment with pancreatic enzyme replacement,
showing marked improvement in stature.

23/04/16 1:35 pm

Pancreatic disorders

10.64

383

10.66

10.65

10.67

Figures 10.64, 10.65 (10.64) A postmortem examination of
a dog with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency showing marked
pancreatic atrophy. (10.65) A microscopic view of the pancreas
showing diminished numbers of acinar epithelial cells (H&E. ×40).

PANCREATIC TUMORS
Definition/overview
Exocrine cancer of the pancreas is rare in the dog and
cat. The majority of the tumors are epithelial and most
are adenocarcinomas of ductular or acinar origin. These
tumors often have an aggressive behavior, with implantation on the peritoneum and metastasis to the liver
common. The liver nodules can be small or quite large
(Figures 10.66–10.71).

Figures 10.66, 10.67 Pancreatic adenocarcinoma in the
cat usually involves the older age group. The usual signs
include anorexia and weight loss. Icterus commonly occurs
and is associated with obstructed bile flow. Shown here are
postmortem findings on two aged cats illustrating rather large
metastatic lesions involving the liver. One cat (10.66) had
obstructed bile flow due to obstruction along the common bile
duct (arrow), while the other cat’s icterus was due to carcinoma
involving the duodenal papilla (10.67) (arrow).

Clinical presentation

There are no known causes of pancreatic adenocarcinoma
in either the dog or the cat.

The most common clinical signs are weight loss and
anorexia. Vomiting is sporadic. Ascites from peritoneal
implants and icterus from common bile duct obstruction
can also occur (Figures 10.72, 10.73).

Pathophysiology

Differential diagnosis

The exact stimulus for this particular tumor formation in
the dog and cat is unknown.

Chronic pancreatitis, any malignant tumor, chronic gastroenteric disease, chronic liver disease.

Etiology

K22463_C010.indd 383

23/04/16 1:35 pm

384

Diseases of specific organ systems

10.71

10.68

10.69

Figure 10.71 Postmortem view of a 15-year-old dog with
pancreatic carcinoma with diffuse liver metastasis.
10.72

Figures 10.68, 10.69 This large pancreatic adenocarcinoma was
found in a 12-year-old Siamese cat that was examined for the
primary complaints of anorexia, weight loss, lethargy, and gradual
abdominal enlargement. Physical examination revealed a large
(>5 cm) anterior mid-abdominal mass. The only clinicopathologic
abnormalities included a leukocytosis and a mildly elevated total
bilirubin. Shown is the tumor at surgery (10.68) and its necrotic
interior in the extirpated specimen (10.69).

10.73

10.70

Figure 10.70 Surgical view of pancreatic adenocarcinoma in
a 13-year-old male Poodle showing the metastatic lesions to
the liver.

K22463_C010.indd 384

Figures 10.72, 10.73 Surgical views of a pancreatic
adenocarcinoma in a 13-year-old male Poodle that has signs of
anorexia and icterus. 10.72 shows the primary neoplasm and
10.73 shows metastatic lesions obstructing the bile duct. The
pertinent serum chemistry abnormalities were: cholesterol 9.64
mmol/l (371 mg/dl), total bilirubin 117.9 mmol/l (6.9 mg/dl),
ALP 28,240 U/l, AST 271 U/l, ALT 380 U/l. The serum amylase
and lipase concentrations were normal at 1,332 and 0.6 U/l,
respectively, as was the CBC.

23/04/16 1:35 pm

Pancreatic disorders

Diagnosis
There are no specific diagnostic tests for pancreatic cancer. The hemogram and serum chemistry panel might
reflect the effect of the disease, as seen with the cholangiostasis associated with metastasis involving the hepatobiliary tree. Pancreatic lipase assays will give varying
results. One of the author’s canine patients had ­markedly
elevated levels of cPLI associated with l­ymphoma infiltrating the pancreas. Abdominal ultrasound can demonstrate abnormal pancreatic parenchyma and metastatic
lesions involving the liver. The definitive diagnosis is
obtained through a diagnostic laparotomy and histopathology on biopsied tissue specimens.

Management
Optimal treatment would be complete surgical extirpation of the tumor. However, a diagnosis is hardly ever
made early enough before the malignancy has had a
chance to spread. The prognosis is always grave.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Büchler MW, Uhl W, Malfertheiner P et al. (2004) (eds.) Diseases
of the Pancreas. Karger, Basel.
Freeman LM, Labato MA, Rush JE et al. (1995) Nutritional
­support in pancreatitis: a retrospective study. J Emerg Med
Crit Care 5(1):32–41.
Gerhardt A, Steiner JM, William DA et al. (2001) Comparison of
the sensitivity of different diagnostic tests for pancreatitis
in cats. J Vet Intern Med 15:329–333.
Hess RS, Sanders M, VanWinkle TJ et al. (1998) Clinical,
­clinicopathologic, radiographic, and ultrasonographic
abnormalities in dogs with fatal acute pancreatitis: 70 cases
(1986–1995). J Am Vet Med Assoc 213(5):665–670.
Hill RC, Van Winkle TJ (1993) Acute necrotizing pancreatitis and
acute suppurative pancreatitis in the cat: a retrospective
review of 40 cases (1976–1989). J Vet Intern Med 7:25–33.

K22463_C010.indd 385

385

Kimmel SE, Washabau RJ, Drobatz KJ (2001) Incidence
and ­prognostic value of low plasma ionized calcium
­concentration in cats with acute pancreatitis: 46 cases
(1996–1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 219(8):1105–1109.
Mansfield C (2012) Pathophysiology of acute pancreatitis:
potential application from experimental models and human
medicine to dogs. J Vet Intern Med 26:875–887.
McCord K, Morley PS, Armstrong J et al. (2012) A multi-institutional
study evaluating the diagnostic utility of spec cPLITM and
SNAPTM in clinical acute pancreatitis in dogs. J Vet Intern Med
26:888–896.
Nagar AB, Gorelick FS (2004) Acute pancreatitis. Curr Opin
Gastroenterol 20(5):439–443.
Ruaux CG (2000) Pathophysiology of organ failure in severe
pancreatitis in dogs. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
22:531–542.
Ruaux CG, Atwell RB (1998) A severity score for spontaneous
canine acute pancreatitis. Aust Vet J 76:804–808.
Saunders HM, Van Winkle TJ, Drobatz K et al. (2002)
Ultrasonographic findings in cats with clinical, gross
pathologic, and histologic evidence of acute ­pancreatic
necrosis: 20 cases (1994–2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc
221(12):1724–1730.
Steiner JM, Williams DA (2000) Serum feline trypsin-like
­immunoreactivity in cats with exocrine pancreatic
­insufficiency. J Vet Intern Med 14:627–629.
Swift NC, Marks SL, MacLachlan NJ et al. (2000) Evaluation of
serum feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity for the diagnosis
of pancreatitis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 217(1):37–42.
Tenner, S, Baillie J, DeWitt J et al. (2013) American College
of Gastroenteritis Guideline: management of acute
­pancreatitis. Am J Gastroenterol 108:1400–1415.
Watson P (2004) Pancreatitis in the dog: dealing with a
­spectrum of disease. In Practice 26(2):64–77.
Wiberg ME, Westermarck E (2002) Subclinical exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
220(8):1183–1187.

23/04/16 1:35 pm

This page intentionally left blank

387

Chapter 11
Endocrine disorders
Michael E. Herrtage

INTRODUCTION
The presentations of endocrine diseases are diverse and
the findings in the history and physical examination
reflect this diversity. Some of the more common presentations are listed in Table 11.1. Although multiple
endocrine disorders can occur in the same animal (for
example, autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes or multiple endocrine neoplasia), most abnormalities affect a
single hormone system. A working knowledge of endocrine physiology is essential not only for a good understanding of the pathophysiology of endocrine disease,
but also for understanding the rationale and limitations
of endocrine function tests.
Advances in our knowledge of endocrine diseases have
been made possible by the widespread availability of sensitive methods for measuring hormone concentrations
and improved diagnostic imaging techniques. The release
of some hormones shows marked diurnal variation, making single determinations difficult to interpret. The pattern of release may also vary with age, sex, stress, diet, or
concurrent disease or medication.
In order to overcome some of these problems of interpretation, dynamic tests have been developed that
determine the response of a gland to stimulation or suppression. Stimulation tests assess the functional reserve of
an endocrine gland by its ability to increase its hormonal

Table 11.1 Common presentations of endocrine disease.
Polyuria–polydipsia
Weight gain/obesity
Weight loss
Poor growth or stunting
Symmetrical alopecia
Episodic weakness and collapse
Hypertension

K22463_C011.indd 387

output. The response may be exaggerated in conditions
where there is excessive function or reduced if the gland
is structurally or functionally damaged. Suppression
tests use the administration of a pure hormone to test the
negative feedback mechanism. Hormonal production is
normally suppressed in these tests, but production persists where the gland is hyperplastic or if a functional
endocrine tumor is present.
This chapter has been structured to provide a practical guide for veterinarians in the diagnosis and management of the more common endocrine disorders.

DISORDERS OF THE PITUITARY
The pituitary gland is a small ovoid structure that lies in
a distinct fossa, the sella turcica, just ventral to the hypothalamus and caudal to the optic chiasma. The pituitary
consists of two distinct parts, an anterior and a posterior
lobe, each of which has separate functions. The hypothalamus and pituitary form a complex functional unit
that controls much of the endocrine system, and any
­space-occupying lesions arising in this area can therefore
cause a wide range of effects.
The hypothalamus is important in the regulation of
anterior and posterior pituitary function. The release of
hormones from the anterior lobe of the pituitary is controlled by hypothalamic peptides, which are transported
to the anterior pituitary by the capillaries of the hypothalamic–hypophyseal portal circulation (Figure 11.1). The
hypothalamus contains a number of autonomic centers
that control thirst, satiety, body temperature, emotional
reactions, and sympathetic responses, and it serves as
an important link between the brain and the endocrine
system.
The posterior pituitary releases stored vasopressin
(antidiuretic hormone [ADH]) and oxytocin, which have
been synthesized in the supraoptic and paraventricular
nuclei of the hypothalamus.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

388

Diseases of specific organ systems

Hypothalamic hormones
TRH
GnRH
Dopamine

CRH
PRH
MSHRH/RIH

11.2

11.1
GHRH
Somatostatin

Figure 11.2 Cystic dilatation of Rathke’s pouch (arrow) in a
German Shepherd Dog with hypopituitarism.
Anterior
lobe
TSH
FSH/LH

Posterior
lobe

ACTH
PRL

GH
αMSH

11.3

Oxytocin
Vasopressin
(ADH)

Pituitary hormones

Figure 11.1 Physiology of hypothalamic–pituitary function.

CONGENITAL HYPOPITUITARISM
Definition/overview
Congenital hypopituitarism results from inadequate
secretion of growth hormone (GH) and resultant retardation of growth (pituitary dwarfism).

Etiology
The condition is rare, but it has been reported in a number of breeds of dog. It is most commonly seen in German
Shepherd Dogs, where it has been shown to be inherited as
an autosomal recessive trait. In the dog, pituitary dwarfism is most commonly associated with cystic dilatation
of Rathke’s pouch, which arises as a result of the failure
of the anterior lobe of the pituitary to develop normally
and results in reduced secretion of anterior pituitary hormones (Figure 11.2). Hypoplasia of the pituitary has been
reported in the cat but also appears to be rare (Figure 11.3).

Pathophysiology
In many affected animals a cystic vestigial adenohypophysis is present, although some animals have either a
hypoplastic pituitary or one that appears grossly normal.
Pituitary dwarfism is not usually caused by an isolated
GH deficiency, but is due to a combined pituitary hormone deficiency affecting anterior lobe function.

K22463_C011.indd 388

Figure 11.3 A 5-month-old kitten with congenital
hypopituitarism.

Clinical presentation
Affected animals appear normal at birth, but growth
retardation is usually evident by weaning (Figure 11.4).
A deficiency of GH produces proportionate dwarfism
(Figure 11.5). The degree of stunting is variable and probably depends on the extent of pituitary damage. Delayed
growth plate closure and dental eruption have been
reported in some cases.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

11.4

Figure 11.4 Three 6-week-old German Shepherd Dog puppies.
The middle puppy is affected with congenital hypopituitarism
and shows growth retardation.
11.5

389

GH is required to produce a normal adult hair coat
in the dog. In pituitary dwarfism the fine puppy coat is
retained and becomes matted and woolly in a
­ ppearance
(Figure 11.5). The hair coat is slowly lost from the trunk,
leading to the development of bilaterally ­symmetrical,
­nonpruritic alopecia by 1 year of age (Figure 11.6). Other
areas, such as the head and feet, are generally spared and
affected dogs retain the facial ­characteristics of a puppy
(Figure 11.7). Hair loss does not appear to be a feature of
congenital hypopituitarism in the cat.
The function of other endocrine systems controlled by the
anterior pituitary is also often affected. In German Shepherd
Dogs with congenital hypopituitarism, there is usually a
combined deficiency of GH, ­thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH), and prolactin together with impaired release of
gonadotropins. While clinical signs of ­secondary hypothyroidism may develop, signs of secondary hypoadrenocorticism are not seen in the German Shepherd Dog because
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) secretion is preserved.
Gonadal involvement may result in testicular atrophy in the
male and abnormal estrous cycles in the bitch.

Differential diagnosis
(See Table 11.2)
11.7

Figure 11.5 An 8-month-old German Shepherd Dog with
congenital hypopituitarism demonstrating proportionate
dwarfism and a woolly coat.
11.6

Figure 11.7 The same dog as in Figure 11.6 showing the
retention of puppy-like facial features.
Table 11.2 Differential diagnosis of poor growth or stunting.

Figure 11.6 An 18-month-old German Shepherd Dog with
congenital hypopituitarism showing bilaterally symmetrical
alopecia. The hair loss is mainly from areas of friction, such as
the flanks, neck, and ventral abdomen, and where hair is lost,
the skin usually becomes hyperpigmented.

K22463_C011.indd 389

Endocrine causes:
•• Congenital hypopituitarism (pituitary dwarf)
•• Congenital hypothyroidism (disproportionate dwarf)
•• Juvenile-onset diabetes mellitus
•• Hyperadrenocorticism
•• Hypoadrenocorticism
•• Diabetes mellitus
(continued)

25/04/16 11:03 pm

390

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 11.2 Differential diagnosis of poor growth or
stunting. (continued)
Nonendocrine causes:
•• Malnutrition
•• Maldigestion (e.g. exocrine pancreatic insufficiency)
•• Malabsorption (e.g. villous atrophy)
•• Severe intestinal parasitism
•• Severe metabolic disorders associated with major organ
dysfunction, for example:
○○ Portosystemic shunting
○○ Congenital renal dysplasia
○○ Congenital heart defects (e.g. tetralogy of Fallot)
○○ Mucopolysaccharidoses
•• Skeletal dysplasias causing disproportionate dwarfism, for
example:
○○ Enchondrodystrophy in the English Pointer
○○ Chondrodysplasia of the Alaskan Malamute

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of congenital hypopituitarism can be made by
measurement of plasma GH concentrations. Since GH is
secreted in pulsatile fashion, basal plasma GH concentrations may be low in healthy animals and a stimulation
test using GH-releasing hormone or an a
­ lpha2-adrenergic
agonist, such as clonidine or xylazine, should be ­performed
(Table 11.3). GH concentration can be assessed indirectly
by measuring insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1). IGF-1
has the advantage of a long half-life and its secretion is
not episodic. Pituitary dwarfs also have abnormally low
serum IGF-1 concentrations. Thyroid function tests and,
if necessary, adrenal function tests should be performed
to assess thyroidal and adrenal function (see Tables 11.8
and 11.15).

Table 11.3 Protocols for testing growth hormones.
GH stimulation test
Indication:
•• Used to diagnose pituitary dwarfism (congenital hypopituitarism) and acromegaly and to evaluate patients with adult-onset
GH-responsive alopecia
•• Basal concentrations of GH are often difficult to interpret due to the overlap between normal dogs and those with GH
­deficiency. Therefore, provocative testing with GH-releasing hormone (GHRH) or an alpha2-adrenergic agonist (such as
­clonidine or xylazine) is recommended
Method:
•• Collect 5 ml of blood into EDTA, centrifuge immediately, and store plasma frozen (<–20°C) for basal GH concentration
•• Inject either GHRH (1 µg/kg IV) or clonidine (10 µg/kg IV, maximum dose 300 µg) or xylazine (100 µg/kg IV)
•• Collect second 5 ml blood sample into EDTA 20 minutes later, centrifuge immediately, and store plasma frozen (<–20°C) for GH
concentration
Interpretation:
•• Reference range in dogs for basal GH concentration is 1–4 ng/ml (µg/l) and peak post-stimulation value is 10–58 ng/ml (µg/l),
but check laboratory reference range
•• GH concentrations are generally reduced in pituitary dwarfism (<1 ng/ml [µg/l]) and show little or no response to stimulation
with GHRH, clonidine, or xylazine
•• Reduced GH concentrations and little or no response to stimulation may be found in adult-onset GH-responsive alopecia.
However, reduced responses may be found in dogs with hypothyroidism or hyperadrenocorticism and these more common
disorders must be excluded as possible diagnoses first
•• Basal GH concentrations are generally elevated in acromegaly (>100 ng/ml [µg/l]) and are not usually further stimulated by
GHRH, clonidine, or xylazine
Basal serum insulin-like growth factor-1
Indication:
Used in the diagnosis of pituitary dwarfism and acromegaly. IGF-1 concentration is regulated by GH and nutritional status and is
less subject to fluctuation than GH. This makes a single determination more meaningful. The assay is more readily available
Interpretation:
•• Reference range for IGF-1 in normal adults is >200 ng/ml and for animals up to 1 year of age is >500 ng/ml
•• Serum IGF-1 concentrations are decreased in pituitary dwarfs (<50 ng/ml). The sensitivity can be increased by comparing IGF-1
concentrations with those of normal littermates. IGF-1 concentrations may also be depressed in chronic debilitating disease
•• Elevated IGF-1 concentrations are seen in dogs and cats with acromegaly (>1,000 ng/ml)

K22463_C011.indd 390

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

A genetic test is available for German Shepherd Dogs
with pituitary dwarfism, which have a mutation of the
gene encoding the transcription factor LHX3. The genetic
test not only identifies affected individuals, but also identifies carriers of the mutation.

Management
Canine GH is not available for therapeutic use, but bovine,
porcine, and human GH preparations have been used
for treatment. The diagnosis of hypopituitarism is usually made too late in development to influence growth
significantly and affected animals remain permanent
dwarfs. However, GH administration (0.1 IU/kg SC 3 times
a week for 4–6 weeks) has been shown to be effective in
some cases in producing regrowth of hair. Treatment with
exogenous GH can be associated with the development
of antibodies, which could interfere with its subsequent
action. GH is expensive and its repeated use may result in
the development of diabetes mellitus.
More recently, progestogens, principally proligesterone and medroxyprogesterone acetate, have been used
to stimulate endogenous GH from the mammary gland
in both male and female pituitary dwarfs with some
­success. This treatment avoids the development of autoantibodies to GH. Proligesterone given subcutaneously at
a dose of 10 mg/kg every 3 weeks until the serum IGF-1
concentration has normalized has been recommended.
Adverse effects such as cystic endometrial hyperplasia
and acromegaly have been reported in some cases.
Thyroid hormone replacement should be used in cases of
secondary hypothyroidism (see Hypothyroidism). Thyroid
hormone therapy has been used, with v
­ ariable success, in
an attempt to stimulate hair growth in p
­ ituitary dwarfs
with normal thyroid function. Half the normal replacement dose of thyroxine is administered for several months
to assess the response to treatment.

391

In the cat, acromegaly is caused by a pituitary tumor
that secretes excess GH. This cause has been reported in
one dog.

Pathophysiology
GH antagonizes the effects of insulin. In acromegaly, mild
glucose intolerance or overt diabetes mellitus d
­ evelops,
which can lead to polyuria and polydipsia. Diabetes ­mellitus
induced by GH may be reversible or permanent depending
on the duration and degree of the excessive GH secretion.
Initially, hyperglycemia is a
­ ssociated with increased insulin concentrations, but as the ­disease p
­ rogresses, beta-cell
exhaustion will result in l­owered ­insulin secretion. Most
cases of a
­ cromegaly ­present with insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus, and patients usually require abnormally
high doses of ­exogenous insulin to control blood glucose
concentrations.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of acromegaly develop slowly and insidiously in middle aged to older cats and bitches. The bitches
are entire and are either cycling normally or being given
regular treatment with progestogens to prevent estrus.
Initially, there is increased soft tissue swelling, particularly around the head and neck, and this may result in
excessive panting, inspiratory stridor, and exercise intolerance (Figure 11.8). There may be excessive skin folds
and thickened skin around the head, neck, and distal
extremities (Figures 11.9, 11.10), and separation of the
teeth with increased interdental spacing, particularly of
the incisor teeth (Figure 11.11).

Differential diagnosis
Hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus.

11.8

ACROMEGALY
Definition/overview
The excessive secretion of GH in adult animals results in
acromegaly, an insidious condition associated with overgrowth of connective tissue and bone.

Etiology
In the dog, acromegaly is mainly caused by progestogen
therapy or by endogenous progesterone produced during
the diestrous phase of the estrous cycle, which induces
GH secretion. Progesterone-induced GH excess originates
from hyperplastic ductular epithelium in the mammary
gland and not from the pituitary.

K22463_C011.indd 391

Figure 11.8 A 14-year-old Domestic Shorthair cat with
acromegaly. Note the broad muzzle.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

392

Diseases of specific organ systems

11.9

11.11

Figure 11.11 A 12-year-old Labrador Retriever with acromegaly
showing separation of incisor teeth with increased interdental
spacing.
11.12

Figure 11.9 A nine-year-old Burmese cat with acromegaly
showing enlargement of the paw.
Figure 11.12 An MR image of the brain of a Domestic Shorthair
cat with acromegaly showing a large pituitary mass (arrow).
11.10

Diagnosis
Laboratory findings of uncontrolled or poorly regulated
diabetes mellitus with hyperglycemia and glycosuria are
found in most cases. A definitive diagnosis of acromegaly
can be made by demonstrating elevated serum concentrations of GH or IGF-1.
CT or MRI of the cranium is required in the cat to
demonstrate the size and position of the pituitary tumor
(Figure 11.12).

Management

Figures 11.10 A 12-year-old Collie-cross dog with acromegaly
showing increased soft tissue around the head and neck.

K22463_C011.indd 392

Successful treatment of acromegaly in the bitch involves
the withdrawal of progestogen therapy and ovariohysterectomy for estrus control. Insulin requirements may
decrease dramatically or even cease completely following
the withdrawal of progestogen therapy or after ovariohysterectomy. Patients should therefore be monitored
very closely to avoid insulin overdosage and the development of hypoglycemia.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

393

11.13

In the cat, pituitary irradiation using a linear accelerator or cobalt-60 source has been successful in reducing the
GH secretion and allowing resolution or improved control
of the diabetes mellitus. Successful treatment following
transsphenoidal hypophysectomy has been described in
a limited number of cats, but further evaluation and longterm follow-up are required before the treatment can be
confidently recommended.

PITUITARY TUMORS
Definition/overview
Primary and secondary tumors can involve the pituitary. Primary tumors may be functional or nonfunctional. Adenomas of the anterior lobe of the
pituitary are the most common tumor and many of
these will secrete ACTH, resulting in pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism.

Pathophysiology
Functional pituitary tumors may produce signs associated with excess hormone production by the tropic endocrine glands. The space-occupying effects of large tumors
may cause compression and destruction of surrounding
pituitary tissue (Figure 11.13, arrows), leading to a reduction in the secretion of tropic hormones, which may result
in clinical signs of hormone deficiency.

Clinical presentation

Figure 11.13 Postmortem specimen showing the effects of a
large pituitary tumor (arrows).

Clinical signs may include those associated with endocrine upset such as polyuria and polydipsia due to excess
secretion of ACTH by a functional corticotroph adenoma
or impaired vasopressin synthesis or release by compression of the posterior pituitary, lethargy and weight gain
due to secondary hypothyroidism, or atrophy of the sex
organs due to reduced gonadotropin release.
Space-occupying effects of a pituitary tumor include
listlessness, depression, anorexia, vomiting, adipsia,
aimless wandering, head pressing, staring, apparent
blindness, ataxia, incoordination, head tilt, circling, and
seizures (Figure 11.14).

Differential diagnosis
Hyperadrenocorticism, acromegaly, hypothyroidism, diabetes insipidus, neurologic conditions.

11.14

Figure 11.14 A 5-year-old Chow Chow with signs of depression
and circling due to a pituitary tumor.

Diagnosis

Management

Diagnosis of a pituitary mass can be confirmed by CT or
MRI (Figure 11.15). Endocrine function tests will help
demonstrate if the tumor is functional or not, or if hypopituitarism is present.

If neurologic signs are present, radiotherapy using megavoltage radiation is the treatment of choice and has
proved successful in reducing the size of the pituitary
mass. Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism can be

K22463_C011.indd 393

25/04/16 11:03 pm

394

Diseases of specific organ systems

11.15

little increase in urine osmolality with increasing plasma
osmolality. In partial CDI, vasopressin is released with
increasing plasma osmolality, but concentrations are
subnormal.

Clinical presentation

treated with trilostane or mitotane (see p. 430). Secondary
hypothyroidism can be treated by replacement thyroxine
(see p. 402).

Clinical signs of diabetes insipidus include marked
­polyuria, frequently with nocturia and incontinence, and
severe polydipsia, with the animal often drinking more
than 100 ml/kg/24 hours. In acquired cases the onset of
clinical signs is usually sudden. Affected dogs and cats
start searching for water and may become anorexic and
lose weight as a result. Despite their increased thirst,
affected animals remain mildly to moderately dehydrated. Affected animals generally show no other clinical signs, although neurologic signs may be noted,
particularly if diabetes insipidus is associated with a
­space-occupying mass such as a pituitary tumor or if the
animal becomes severely hypernatremic when deprived
of water.

DIABETES INSIPIDUS

Differential diagnosis

Figure 11.15 Sagittal T2-weighted MR image of a 12-year-old
Dalmatian with a large pituitary mass (arrows) causing both
caudal transtentorial and foramen magnum herniation
(arrowheads).

Definition/overview
Vasopressin (ADH) released from the posterior lobe of the
pituitary increases the permeability of the distal convoluted tubules and collecting ducts of the kidney and thus
controls water excretion. Diabetes insipidus results from
a deficiency of vasopressin and is characterized by severe
and uncontrolled polyuria, with resultant polydipsia.

Etiology
Diabetes insipidus can be caused by either a partial or
total failure to synthesize or release vasopressin (central
diabetes insipidus [CDI]) or a partial or total failure of the
renal tubules to respond to vasopressin (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus [NDI]).
Both forms of diabetes insipidus may be congenital or
acquired. CDI may result from neoplasia or head trauma,
but is usually idiopathic in the dog and cat. Rarely, inflammatory and parasitic lesions have been associated with
CDI. NDI may be secondary to various drugs, a variety of
renal and metabolic disorders including chronic kidney
disease, renal medullary fibrosis, tubular necrosis, hyperadrenocorticism, pyometra, and hypercalcemia, or it may
be idiopathic.

Pathophysiology
Plasma osmolality is the major determinant of vasopressin release, but hypovolemia and hypotension can
also stimulate ADH production. In total CDI there is

K22463_C011.indd 394

The differential diagnosis of polyuria and polydipsia is
given in Table 11.4. Diabetes insipidus must be differentiated from primary polydipsia with resultant polyuria,
so-called psychogenic polydipsia (PP), where there is a
relative lack of vasopressin due to overhydration and,
Table 11.4 Differential diagnosis of polydipsia–polyuria.
Polyuria with compensatory polydipsia
Osmotic diuresis:
•• Diabetes mellitus
•• Primary renal glycosuria/Fanconi’s syndrome
•• Polyuric renal failure/postobstructive diuresis
Interference with ADH release and/or renal response
to ADH
Chronic kidney disease
Glomerulopathy/nephrotic syndrome
Pyelonephritis
Pyometra
Hyperadrenocorticism
Chronic liver disease
Hypercalcemia
Hypoadrenocorticism
Central diabetes insipidus
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Hypokalemia
Hyperthyroidism
Drugs/diet
Primary polydipsia
Psychogenic polydipsia

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

frequently, reduced renal concentrating power due to a
decrease in medullary hypertonicity from the wash-out
effect of handling large quantities of fluid.

395

discontinued if the patient loses more than 5% of its body
weight. Urine and plasma osmolality measurements provide more definitive information than urine SG alone
(Figure 11.16).
The ADH response test (Table 11.6) is used to distinguish CDI from NDI. Dogs and cats with CDI will concentrate their urine in response to the administration
of exogenous ADH, whereas dogs with NDI will show no
response.

Diagnosis
Hematologic, biochemical, and electrolyte profiles are
generally unremarkable in animals with CDI or idiopathic
NDI. When abnormalities are noted they are usually secondary to dehydration. The most significant finding
is very dilute urine of low specific gravity (SG), usually
between 1.001 and 1.005. The urine SG is almost invariably less than that of glomerular filtrate (i.e. <1.010),
indicating good renal tubular function with resorption of
solute in excess of water.
Urine osmolality is low and typically below that of
plasma, which is often mildly or moderately elevated
due to the concomitant dehydration (Table 11.5). In PP
the plasma osmolality is usually decreased due to the
overhydration.
A carefully monitored water deprivation test
(Table 11.6) will confirm the animal’s inability to concentrate its urine in diabetes insipidus, despite becoming dehydrated. Renal function must be assessed before
undertaking this test and the test must always be

Management
Successful treatment of CDI requires long-term replacement therapy using desmopressin, a vasopressin analog.
Desmopressin is available in the form of an injection,
nasal drops, or tablets. It can provide antidiuretic activity
for about 8 hours. One to four drops of the nasal preparation placed in the conjunctival sac twice daily will control
the polydipsia and polyuria in most dogs and cats with
CDI. Oral therapy (200 µg 1–3 times daily) has proved
effective in some cases, but generally the tablets appear
to be less effective.
Chlorpropamide, an oral sulfonylurea hypoglycemic
agent, potentiates the effects of vasopressin on the renal
tubules and, therefore, requires at least the presence of

Table 11.5 Differentiation of central diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and psychogenic polydipsia.

Parameter

Before water
deprivation

After water deprivation
CDI

NDI

PP

Urine
Specific gravity

<1.010

<1.010

<1.010

<1.025

Osmolality

<300

<300

<300

<700

>300 CDI or NDI

>310

>310

±310

<1.0

<1.0

<1.0

2–3

Urine specific gravity

<1.010

>1.015

<1.010

<1.025

U:P osmolality

<1.0

>1.0

<1.0

>1.0

Plasma
Osmolality

<295 PP
U:P osmolality

ADH response test

Note: Osmolality measured in mOsm/kg.

K22463_C011.indd 395

25/04/16 11:03 pm

396

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 11.6 Protocol for water deprivation and antidiuretic hormone response testing.
Water deprivation test
Indication:
•• Used in the diagnosis of diabetes insipidus. Does not differentiate between the central and nephrogenic forms of the disease
The test should only be performed in animals with normal blood urea and creatinine concentrations
Method:
•• Collect 5 ml of urine and plasma if osmolality is being measured. If specific gravity is to be measured, only urine is required
•• Weigh patient
•• Withhold all fluids and food
•• Collect urine and plasma after 8 hours and then at 2-hour intervals until the test is complete. It is rarely safe or necessary to
continue this test for 24 hours
•• Weigh patient each time urine and plasma is collected
•• Stop test if patient demonstrates adequate concentrating ability (specific gravity >1.020) or if patient becomes dehydrated
and loses 5% of its body weight or more
Interpretation:
•• Cases of central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus fail to concentrate urine (specific gravity <1.010) and urine osmolality
remains low and does not exceed that of plasma
•• This test does not always give conclusive results, especially if plasma and urine osmolality are not measured
Vasopressin (ADH) response test
Indication:
•• Used to differentiate between central and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Method:
•• Collect 5 ml of urine and plasma if osmolality is being measured. Only urine is required if specific gravity is to be measured
•• Inject desmopressin intramuscularly. Use 2 µg for dogs <15 kg and 4 µg for dogs >15 kg
•• Collect urine and plasma samples every 2 hours
Interpretation:
•• Dogs with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus will show very little or no response to exogenous vasopressin and the urine specific
gravity and osmolality will remain low
•• Dogs with central diabetes insipidus will concentrate their urine, usually within 6 hours (specific gravity >1.015); the urine
osmolality will rise by 50% or more and will exceed the plasma osmolality

11.16

Figure 11.16 Urine samples from a dog with central diabetes
insipidus taken during a water deprivation test. The specific
gravity never increased above 1.008 despite the dog losing 5%
of its body weight during the test.

K22463_C011.indd 396

some endogenous vasopressin in order to be effective.
Chlorpropamide has been shown to be effective in partial CDI in humans; however, the results in dogs with CDI
have been inconsistent. In some cases it may take several
weeks to obtain an effect. Hypoglycemia is a potential
adverse effect. A dose of 10–40 mg/kg PO q24h has been
suggested in dogs. Chlorpropamide is not recommended
for use in cats.
Thiazide diuretics such as hydrochlorothiazide and
chlorothiazide have a paradoxical effect in both CDI
and NDI. Urine output may be decreased by up to 50%,
although the urine is still dilute. The suggested doses for
hydrochlorothiazide and chlorothiazide are 2–4 mg/kg
q12h and 20–40 mg/kg q12h, respectively. The precise
dose should be tailored to each patient and the effect may
be enhanced by concurrent use of a sodium-restricted

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

diet. Patients should be monitored periodically for electrolyte disturbances, particularly hypokalemia.
Idiopathic CDI has a favorable prognosis with treatment. Animals with an expanding hypothalamic or pituitary tumor have a more guarded prognosis, especially if
neurologic signs are present. CDI following head trauma
carries a variable prognosis; spontaneous recovery may
occur within a few days or weeks in some cases, but in
others the damage is permanent. NDI tends to have a
more guarded prognosis and a search for a primary cause
should be undertaken in order to provide more appropriate therapy.

DISORDERS OF THE THYROID GLAND
The thyroid gland consists of two lobes, which are not
normally palpable in healthy dogs or cats. Palpable
enlargement of the thyroid from any cause is referred
to as goiter. Two parathyroid glands are associated with
each thyroid lobe. The internal parathyroids usually lie
within the thyroid capsule at the caudal pole of each lobe.
The thyroid gland actively takes up inorganic iodide,
resulting in concentrations that are 10–200 times that of
serum. The inorganic iodide enters the thyroid follicular
cells and is transformed into the metabolically active thyroid hormones thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3).
The synthesis and secretion of T4 and T3 are controlled
by TSH secreted by the thyrotroph cells of the anterior
pituitary. Secretion of TSH is stimulated by thyrotropin
releasing hormone (TRH), a hypothalamic tripeptide. A
classic negative feedback system operates to maintain
the plasma concentrations of T4 and T3 within close limits (Figure 11.17).
In plasma, more than 99% of T4 and T3 is bound to
plasma proteins, mainly albumin and globulins. It is the
free (unbound) hormones that are metabolically active.
Although T4 is the major secretory product of the thyroid gland, the metabolic activity of T3 is much greater.
About 80% of the plasma T3 concentration is produced by
deiodination of T4 in peripheral tissues, mainly the liver,
muscle, and kidneys. In catabolic states, such as those
produced by starvation, anorexia, or debilitating disease,
T4 is deiodinated to reverse T3 (rT3), an inactive metabolite, at the expense of T3 production.
Thyroid hormones play a dominant role in controlling
metabolism. They increase basal metabolic rate, stimulate cellular oxygen consumption, promote carbohydrate
absorption from the intestine, and regulate lipid metabolism. Thyroid hormones are also essential for normal
growth and development and they activate the anagen
(growth) phase of the hair cycle. Some effects of thyroid

K22463_C011.indd 397

Stimulation
Dopamine
Norepinephrine
Histamine
Serotonin
TRH

397

Inhibition
TSH
Thyroid hormones

11.17

Hypothalamus

Negative
feedback

TSH

Anterior pituitary

Thyroid gland
Total
T4
Protein-bound Free T4
T4

Total
Plasma
T3
Protein-bound Free T3
T3

T4
rT3

Peripheral tissues
T3

Figure 11.17 Physiology of thyroid function.

hormones, such as stimulation of the nervous and cardiovascular systems, are mediated by increased sensitivity
to catecholamines.

HYPOTHYROIDISM
Definition/overview
Hypothyroidism is a multisystemic disorder resulting
from inadequate circulating thyroid hormone concentrations. It is considered a common endocrinopathy in the
dog and estimates of incidence range from 1 in 156 to 1 in
500 depending on the criteria for diagnosis. However, in
the past hypothyroidism may have been overdiagnosed,
as the clinical signs are vague and nonspecific and diagnostic tests frequently give false positive results in euthyroid dogs.
Naturally occurring hypothyroidism is a rare clinical
disorder in cats.

Etiology
Primary hypothyroidism is caused by an intrinsic disorder of the thyroid gland and is the most common type
of hypothyroidism in the dog. Hypothyroidism usually
results from lymphocytic thyroiditis or thyroid atrophy. Thyroid atrophy may be the end-stage of lymphocytic thyroiditis (Figures 11.18a, b). Thyroid neoplasia
can occasionally be associated with hypothyroidism,
although most dogs with thyroid tumors have normal
thyroid function. Congenital hypothyroidism (cretinism)

25/04/16 11:03 pm

398

Diseases of specific organ systems

is rare and may be caused by thyroid agenesis, dysgenesis, or dyshormonogenesis. Secondary hypothyroidism is usually associated with pituitary neoplasia, but
it may also occur with congenital panhypopituitarism.
Hypothalamic dysfunction, iodine deficiency, and serum
transport defects are rare causes of hypothyroidism.
The most common cause of feline hypothyroidism is
iatrogenic destruction or removal of the thyroid gland
following radioactive iodine therapy or surgery for the
treatment of hyperthyroidism. Spontaneous acquired
hypothyroidism has been reported in a cat with lymphocytic thyroiditis. Congenital hypothyroidism has been
reported in the cat and may be associated with goiter.

11.18

a

b
Figures 11.18a, b Hypothyroidism. (a) Histopathologic
microscopic view of lymphocytic thyroiditis in a dog showing
the infiltrating lymphocytes. (H&E stain). (b) Histopathologic
indirect immunofluorescent demonstration of autoimmune
thyroiditis. The immunofluorescence represents antibodies that
are bound to the thyroid epithelial cells. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C011.indd 398

Pathophysiology
Hypothyroidism may result from dysfunction of any
part of the hypothalamic–pituitary–thyroid axis. In lymphocytic thyroiditis there is infiltration of the thyroid
gland by lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells.
Leukocytes and degenerate follicular cells may be found
within vacuolated colloid. The parenchyma becomes progressively destroyed and replaced by fibrous connective
tissue. In follicular atrophy the parenchyma is replaced
by adipose connective tissue. In secondary hypothyroidism the follicular epithelial cells become flattened and
the follicles become distended with colloid.

Clinical presentation
The clinical signs of hypothyroidism are very variable
and often vague. Some cases present with a classic combination of clinical signs, whereas others may exhibit
only one sign. Hypothyroidism usually affects young to
middle aged dogs of the larger breeds. Golden Retrievers,
Dobermanns, Boxers, Great Danes, and Irish Setters
appear to be overrepresented.
Lethargy, mental dullness, bradycardia, poor exercise tolerance, weight gain without an increase in food
intake, intolerance to cold, and hypothermia are the most
common clinical signs associated with hypothyroidism.
Bilaterally symmetrical, nonpruritic alopecia affecting the
flanks, thorax, ventral trunk, and neck is associated with
­inhibition of the hair cycle (Figure 11.19). The remaining hair coat is dry and dull. The skin is often thickened
(myxedematous) and hyperpigmented. Myxedema of the
skin is most evident on the head, ­resulting in a ‘tragic’
facial expression (Figure 11.20). The skin, particularly
on the ventral abdomen, may be cold and clammy to the
touch. Comedones, seborrhea, and recurrent pyoderma
may also be noted. Intact females often have abnormal
estrous cycles and reduced fertility. Constipation and corneal lipidosis (Figure 11.21) may occasionally be noted.
Neurologic signs may be seen in some dogs with
hypothyroidism and include neuromuscular dysfunction with cranial nerve abnormalities, laryngeal paralysis, megaesophagus, lower motor neuron disease, and
encephalopathy (Figures 11.22, 11.23). Clinical signs of
lameness, dragging of the feet, quadriparesis, hearing
impairment, and nystagmus have also been reported.
Electromyography may reveal fibrillation potentials
and positive sharp waves. Motor nerve conduction
velocities may be decreased and tendon reflexes appear
sluggish.
Congenital hypothyroidism has been reported in a
number of breeds including the Boxer and the Giant
­
Schnauzer. Clinical signs of congenital h
­ ypothyroidism

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

399

11.22

11.19

Figure 11.19 A 6-year-old Dobermann with bilaterally
symmetrical alopecia due to hypothyroidism.

11.23

11.20

Figures 11.22, 11.23 This young Labrador Retriever was
referred to neurology for signs of tetraparesis and abnormal
cranial nerve function (note the dysconjugate eye positioning).
The diagnosis was hypothyroid neuropathy. The dog made a
complete recovery with levothyroxine replacement treatment.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

Figure 11.20 A 7-year-old Labrador Retriever with
hypothyroidism showing a ‘tragic’ expression.

11.21

include
hypothermia,
lethargy,
disproportionate
dwarfism with a short, broad skull, short thick limbs
­
and kyphosis, delayed dental eruption, thickened skin,
and a dry ­hair coat (Figure 11.24). Radiographic changes
include delayed epiphyseal ossification and epiphyseal
d
­ ysgenesis (Figure 11.25). Congenital ­
hypothyroidism
has also been seen in the cat (Figure 11.26).

Differential diagnosis
Pituitary tumor or cyst, surgery (thyroidectomy or
hypophysectomy), drugs (particularly antithyroid drugs
and glucocorticoids), diet/obesity, hyperadrenocorticism.

Diagnosis
Laboratory findings
Figure 11.21 An 8-year-old Golden Retriever with
hypothyroidism showing corneal lipidosis around the limbal
margin.

K22463_C011.indd 399

Hypercholesterolemia is found in about 70% of
hypothyroid dogs. Thyroid hormones stimulate bili­
ary excretion of cholesterol and a deficiency of these

25/04/16 11:03 pm

400

Diseases of specific organ systems

11.24

11.26

Figure 11.24 Two 7-month-old Boxer littermates. The puppy on
the left has congenital hypothyroidism.
11.25

Figure 11.26 This approximately 6-month-old kitten was the
runt of the litter due to its congenital hypothyroid condition.
(Courtesy A. Specht)
Table 11.7 Causes of hypercholesterolemia.
Postprandial hyperlipidemia
Secondary hyperlipidemia:
•• Hypothyroidism
•• Hyperadrenocorticism
•• Diabetes mellitus
•• Cholestatic liver disease
•• Nephrotic syndrome
Primary (idiopathic) hyperlipidemia

Mild to moderate increases in serum activity of ALT,
AST, ALP, and CK may be noted. Increased CK activity
is particularly associated with myopathy in cases of
hypothyroidism.
Figure 11.25 Craniocaudal radiograph of the carpus of a
10-month-old Boxer with congenital hypothyroidism showing
delayed ossification and epiphyseal dysgenesis.

hormones results in an increase in the cholesterol content of the liver. To prevent overloading the liver with
cholesterol, the low-density lipoprotein receptors are
downregulated to limit low-density and high-density
­
lipoprotein uptake from the circulation. Plasma concentrations of these ­lipoproteins rise, causing hypercholesterolemia. Causes of hypercholesterolemia are listed in
Table 11.7.
Mild normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative
anemia occurs in about 30% of hypothyroid dogs and represents a physiologic response to the lowered basal metabolic rate.

K22463_C011.indd 400

Thyroid function tests
The dynamic thyroid function tests and their protocols
are listed in Table 11.8.

Serum total and free T4
Baseline serum T4 concentration using a validated assay
is more accurate than serum T3 in assessing the status
of thyroid gland function and is recommended for initial
evaluation of the thyroid gland. Random fluctuations
in serum T4 concentrations occur, but a true circadian
rhythm has not been identified.
Serum T4 concentrations can be affected by breed,
age, illness, and drug administration. Certain breeds,
particularly sighthounds, have lower serum T4 concentrations than other breeds and this is important
when interpreting results from Greyhounds or Afghan

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

401

Table 11.8 Protocol and interpretation of the TSH and TRH stimulation tests.
TSH stimulation test
Protocol:
•• Collect plasma or serum sample for basal T4 concentration
•• Administer 50–75 µg/dog recombinant human TSH intravenously
•• Collect second sample for T4 concentration 6 hours later
Interpretation:
•• A diagnosis of primary hypothyroidism can be confirmed if both the pre- and post-T4 samples are below the reference range
for basal T4 concentration
•• In normal animals the T4 concentration should be stimulated to well within or above the normal reference range for T4. In
most animals the T4 concentration should increase by at least 1.5 times the basal concentration
•• Interpretation of intermediate results is more difficult and may occur in association with nonthyroid illness, treatment with
certain drugs, secondary hypothyroidism, or possibly in the early stages of primary hypothyroidism
TRH stimulation test
Protocol:
•• Collect plasma or serum sample for basal T4 concentration
•• Administer 200 µg/dog protirelin (TRH-[Cambridge Laboratories, UK]) intravenously. Injection may cause salivation, vomiting,
and tachycardia
•• Collect second sample for T4 concentration 4 hours later
Interpretation:
•• Similar to TSH stimulation test, although stimulation of T4 concentrations is less than with TSH and the response to TRH shows
greater individual variation

Hounds, for example. Serum T4 concentrations tend to
be higher in young growing puppies and lower in old
dogs when compared with normal adult concentrations.
Concurrent illness can suppress serum thyroid hormone
concentrations (sick euthyroid syndrome). The degree
of suppression is dependent on the severity of the illness or catabolic state rather than the specific disorder.
Various drugs can alter thyroid hormone metabolism
and serum binding, particularly glucocorticoids, anticonvulsants, NSAIDs, potentiated sulfonamides, furosemide, and anesthetic agents.
Serum free T4 concentrations measure metabolically
active T4 and should not be influenced by the effects of
serum binding. However, measurement of serum free
T4 by most assays, which do not employ equilibrium
­dialysis, has not proved to be any more reliable than
total T4 c­ oncentrations in the diagnosis of hypothyroidism. Serum free T4 measured by equilibrium dialysis
can prove useful in differentiating genuine hypothyroidism when the total T4 concentration is in the reference
range.
A low basal serum T4 concentration, with a history
and clinical signs compatible with hypothyroidism, may
be sufficient evidence to warrant a therapeutic trial. In
one study the predictive value of a positive test result
was 0.75 and of a negative test result was 0.87 when using
T4 concentrations to diagnose hypothyroidism. Serum
T4 concentrations in the low normal or nondiagnostic

K22463_C011.indd 401

range should have further tests performed (e.g. a canine
TSH concentration and/or a TSH or TRH stimulation
test) provided the index of suspicion is still high for
hypothyroidism.
Serum T4 concentrations in the normal range are unlikely
to be associated with hypothyroidism. However, antibodies
to thyroid hormone can cause discordance between measured thyroid hormone concentrations and the clinical status of the dog. Depending on their concentration, binding
affinity, and the assay method employed, thyroid antibodies can result in either falsely elevated or falsely low thyroid hormone concentrations. Autoantibodies to T4 and T3
can be measured in these cases.

Serum total T3 and free T3
Baseline serum T3 concentrations are less accurate for
predicting hypothyroidism than serum T4. Random fluctuations in serum T3 concentrations are greater than
with serum T4 and have a greater tendency to be misleading with respect to the status of thyroid gland function. Possible explanations for this discrepancy include
the normal thyroid gland’s preference for secreting T4,
the intracellular formation and location of most T3, the
preferential secretion of T3 compared with T4 as thyroid function progressively fails, and the development
of anti-T3 antibodies. The diagnostic value of serum T3
concentrations in hypothyroidism is therefore inferior to
serum T4.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

402

Diseases of specific organ systems

Endogenous canine TSH

Thyroglobulin autoantibodies (TgAA)

Measurement of canine TSH (c-TSH) has revolutionized
the testing for hypothyroidism, particularly in primary
hypothyroidism where the concentrations should be high
because of loss of the negative feedback effect of thyroid
hormones. A validated c-TSH assay is now widely available, but unfortunately it has been shown that not all
cases of primary hypothyroidism exhibit elevated c-TSH
concentrations and that some euthyroid dogs as well as
some dogs with nonthyroidal illness may have elevated
TSH concentrations. The general conclusions are that
c-TSH measurements are useful when measured together
with serum total T4 concentrations in the diagnosis of
cases of suspected hypothyroidism; however, the sensitivity and specificity of the assay, particularly at lower
concentrations, are insufficient to obviate the need for a
dynamic test (TSH or TRH stimulation test) to confirm the
diagnosis in some cases of hypothyroidism.

Lymphocytic thyroiditis is a major cause of canine
hypothyroidism and, as part of the inflammatory process, antibodies to thyroid antigens are released into
the ­circulation. Thyroglobulin is the principal antigen
for which measurable serum antibodies are present.
Therefore, measurement of TgAA provides evidence of
an active inflammatory process in the the thyroid gland.
However, the presence of TgAA does not provide information about thyroid function, since at least 60–70% of
the gland has to be destroyed before thyroid dysfunction
occurs. Consequently, both lymphocytic thyroiditis and
TgAA can be found in dogs that are not hypothyroid and,
in dogs where hypothyroidism is caused by thyroid atrophy, circulating TgAA may not be present at all.

TSH stimulation test
The administration of exogenous TSH to measure thyroid secretory reserve is the most definitive method
currently available for the diagnosis of hypothyroidism.
Unfortunately, pharmaceutical grade bovine TSH has limited availability, but more recently recombinant human
TSH has become available. The protocol and interpretation criteria are given in Table 11.8. The use of this test is
limited by the expense of the TSH injection.
Peak serum T4 responses are decreased by nonthyroidal illness and drug administration in the same way as
basal T4 concentrations. Thyroid function testing is thus
best performed after resolution of nonthyroidal illness
and, if possible, with the patient off all medication.

TRH stimulation test
TRH is readily available and less expensive than TSH.
However, the T4 response to TRH is less predictable and
peak concentrations tend to be lower than with TSH stimulation. Increasing the dose of TRH increases the duration
but not the magnitude of the T4 response. TRH administration may cause cholinergic signs such as salivation,
vomiting, and defecation. Responses are also affected by
nonthyroidal illness and drug administration.

Reverse T3 (rT3)
Measurement of serum rT3 concentration can be useful
in identifying cases with significant nonthyroidal illness
and should be reserved for those cases with discordant or
equivocal T4 concentrations. If the serum rT3 concentration
is high in a dog with low or low-normal T4, hypothyroidism
is unlikely to be the cause of the animal’s clinical signs.

K22463_C011.indd 402

Thyroid biopsy
Although not commonly performed, histologic examination of a thyroid gland biopsy provides an accurate
method of differentiating between primary and secondary hypothyroidism. In primary hypothyroidism there is
loss of thyroid follicles resulting from either lymphocytic
thyroiditis or thyroid atrophy. In secondary hypothyroidism the thyroid follicles become distended with colloid
and the follicular epithelial cells are flattened. Testing
thyroid function is still required to make a diagnosis of
hypothyroidism, since the degree of histologic change
does not always relate to reduced hormone production
and release.

Management
Thyroid hormone replacement is required for the treatment of hypothyroidism. Synthetic forms of T4 and T3
are available. Sodium levothyroxine (L-thyroxine) is the
treatment of choice because it most closely resembles the
preferential secretion of T4 by the normal thyroid gland.
Synthetic T4 is readily deiodinated to T3 in peripheral tissues and therefore does not bypass the normal cellular
regulatory processes that control the production of the
more potent T3 in those tissues.
An initial replacement dose of L-thyroxine is
20–40 µg/kg daily in divided doses. Although it has
been suggested that once daily dosing is sufficient in
many cases, the author has documented a number of
cases where once daily administration has failed to
maintain ­
adequate serum concentrations throughout
the day, with a ­consequent failure of the clinical signs
to resolve fully. Poor ­absorption and a shorter half-life
for T4 explain why dogs require higher doses and more
frequent ­
administration than human patients with
hypothyroidism.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

Therapy should always be continued for a minimum
of 3 months. Improved activity and mental alertness
are usually seen within 2 weeks, but skin and hair coat
changes may take up to 6 months to resolve.
The effect of treatment can be monitored by
measurement of post-pill serum T4 concentrations.
­
Sampling 4–6 hours after dosing will give a peak serum
T4 concentration and a sample taken just prior to ­dosing
will give the lowest serum T4 concentration. The dose
and frequency of administration should be adjusted to
­maintain the serum T4 concentration in the high end of
the ­reference range throughout the day. Underdosage may
lead to ­treatment failure and overdosage can lead to iatrogenic hyperthyroidism. Replacement therapy is required
for life.
Possible causes for cases failing to respond to replacement therapy include misdiagnosis, inadequate dose or
frequency of administration, poor gastrointestinal (GI)
absorption, and peripheral tissue resistance.

403

Congenital hypothyroidism should be treated as early
as possible to achieve normal growth and development.
The dose will require adjustment as the patient grows
and becomes older, so post-pill assessments are required
at monthly intervals during the first year of life.

HYPOTHYROID MYXEDEMA
Definition/overview
Myxedema coma is an extreme form of hypothyroidism
with an acute presentation that can prove life-threatening.
It is considered to be a complication of chronic hypothyroidism and is manifest by impaired mental status, thermoregulation, respiratory and cardiovascular function.

Clinical presentation
Affected dogs, mostly Dobermanns, are profoundly dull
and present stuporous or comatose with hypothermia in
the absence of shivering (Figures 11.27a–c). The skin can
11.27

a

b

c

K22463_C011.indd 403

Figures 11.27a–c This Dobermann was referred to the
neurology service to evaluate generalized weakness. The dog
was profoundly mentally depressed and recumbent. Shown
is the dog initially (a, b) and subsequently improved with
treatment (c).

25/04/16 11:03 pm

404

Diseases of specific organ systems

be myxedematous due to the accumulation of mucopolysaccharides and hyaluronic acid. Bradycardia, hypotension, and hypoventilation are also evident.

Diagnosis
Laboratory test
hypothyroidism.

results

are

characteristic

of

Management
Treatment entails gradual warming, avoiding overhydration from IV fluids, monitoring ventilation and providing
support if needed, and administration of glucocorticoids
and L-thyroxine.

HYPERTHYROIDISM
Definition/overview

by the duration of hyperthyroidism, the ability of the
body systems to cope with the demands imposed by thyroid hormone excess, and the presence of concomitant
disease in the older animal. In most cases the clinical
signs of hyperthyroidism are slowly progressive, with an
insidious onset.
The major presenting sign, therefore, is progressive weight loss frequently accompanied by polyphagia
(Figure 11.28). Since most cats maintain a good appetite and remain active for their age, owners frequently
feel the cat is in good health until weight loss or other
signs develop. Affected cats are often hyperactive and
become irritable or aggressive, which can make clinical
examination difficult (Figure 11.29). Polydipsia and polyuria are common. Intermittent GI signs such as vomiting, diarrhea, and the passage of voluminous fatty feces

Hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis) is a multisystemic disorder resulting from excessive circulating concentrations of
T4 and/or T3. Hyperthyroidism is the most common endocrine disorder of the domestic cat, but is rare in the dog.

11.28

Etiology
Functional adenomatous hyperplasia (adenoma) affecting one or, more commonly, both thyroid lobes is the most
common cause of feline hyperthyroidism. Iatrogenic
hyperthyroidism caused by excessive thyroid hormone
supplementation is recognized occasionally. Thyroid carcinoma is a rare cause of hyperthyroidism in the cat. In
the dog, although thyroid carcinoma is the most common
thyroid tumor, it is rarely functional.

Pathophysiology

Figure 11.28 A 13-year-old Domestic Shorthair cat with
hyperthyroidism.

The pathogenesis is unknown, but the frequent involvement of both thyroid lobes would suggest a circulating
factor may be involved. Recent epidemiologic studies
suggest there is an increased risk of developing feline
hyperthyroidism associated with indoor living and consumption of canned cat food, in particular fish flavors.

11.29

Clinical presentation
Hyperthyroidism is a disease of middle aged to older cats,
with a mean age of 13 years and a range of 6–21 years.
Only about 6% of hyperthyroid cats are younger than 10
years of age at the time of diagnosis. There is no breed or
sex predisposition.
The clinical signs of hyperthyroidism relate to the
excessive secretion of thyroid hormones and their general stimulatory effect on different body systems. The
frequency and severity of the clinical signs are highly
variable in cats with hyperthyroidism and are influenced

K22463_C011.indd 404

Figure 11.29 A 15-year-old Domestic Shorthair cat with
hyperthyroidism showing irritation.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

are also frequent clinical signs. Occasionally, systemic
­hypertension with retinal hemorrhages and/or detachment may occur, but generally, hypertension, if present,
is only mild to moderate in severity.
Cardiac abnormalities are frequently recognized in
hyperthyroid cats. There is usually a tachycardia with a
heart rate in excess of 240 bpm. Systolic murmurs, gallop rhythms, or dysrhythmias are frequently detected
on auscultation. In severe cases, clinical signs of congestive heart failure (CHF) may develop and these may
include dyspnea resulting from pulmonary edema or
accumulation of pleural fluid and ascites. The cardiac
signs are associated with cardiomyopathy, usually the
hypertrophic form, which develops secondarily to excessive thyroid hormone secretion. Electrocardiographic
abnormalities may include tachycardia, increased R wave
amplitude, particularly in lead II, and various atrial and
ventricular dysrhythmias and conduction disturbances
(Figure 11.30).
Although there are no specific skin lesions, the coat of
cats with hyperthyroidism is often matted and unkempt
(Figure 11.31). Affected cats may also develop heat intolerance with panting and dysphonia. Although most
hyperthyroid cats are polyphagic and hyperactive, about
10% of cases are presented with severe depression and
muscle weakness, which may result in ventroflexion of
the neck. Weight loss remains a feature, but is usually
associated with anorexia rather than increased appetite.
Cardiac abnormalities are also common. This clinical presentation is referred to as ‘apathetic’ hyperthyroidism.
In most cases there is palpable enlargement of one
or both thyroid lobes (Figure 11.32). Thyroid palpation
requires both skill and practice. The thyroid gland is not
usually palpable in the normal cat. Enlarged lobes of the

405

thyroid are usually located just distal to the larynx, but
they can be quite mobile and descend down the neck and
occasionally pass into the thoracic inlet. Ectopic thyroid
tissue located anywhere from the base of tongue to the
base of the heart is occasionally involved in the pathogenesis of the condition.

Differential diagnosis
Chronic kidney disease, intestinal disorders (e.g. inflammatory bowel disease), lymphoma, diabetes mellitus,
chronic liver disease.
11.31

Figure 11.31 Hyperthyroid cat showing its unkempt hair coat.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)
11.32

11.30

II

Figure 11.30 ECG from a 13-year-old Domestic Shorthair cat
with hyperthyroidism showing sinus tachycardia. The heart rate
is approximately 260 bpm.

K22463_C011.indd 405

Figure 11.32 Hyperthyroid cat showing a large goiter.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 11:03 pm

406

Diseases of specific organ systems

Diagnosis
Laboratory findings
Routine hematologic and biochemical screening tests are
useful not only because results may show alterations that
support a diagnosis of hyperthyroidism, but because they
may also indicate evidence of concurrent disease in the
older cat. The most frequent hematologic change is a relative polycythemia with a mild to moderate increase in
red cell parameters (red blood cell count, PCV, and Hgb
concentration). A mature neutrophilia with lymphopenia
and eosinopenia is also common and probably reflects a
stress response. However, eosinophilia and lymphocytosis are found in some cats with hyperthyroidism.
A mild to moderate increase in serum activity of the
enzymes ALT, AST, ALP, and LDH is a frequent but nonspecific finding. The reason for the increase is not clear, but
in some cases it might be related to a relative hypoxemia
in the portal circulation. Evidence of concurrent renal
dysfunction in hyperthyroidism is common, with mild to
moderate elevations in serum creatinine and urea. These
increases may be related to increased protein catabolism
and prerenal azotemia. Careful consideration should be
given to the method of treatment selected for hyperthyroid cats with concomitant azotemia, since some of these
cats may develop clinical signs of renal failure caused by
a deterioration in renal function when the hyperthyroid
state is corrected.

Diagnostic imaging
Hyperthyroid cats with secondary cardiomyopathy
usually show cardiac enlargement, which is evident on
both radiographic and echocardiographic examinations.
However, it is important to recognize that significant
concentric hypertrophy can occur without affecting the
appearance of the cardiac silhouette on thoracic radiographs (Figure 11.33), and the diagnosis of cardiomyopathy in these cases can only be made on echocardiographic
findings (Figure 11.34).
Thyroid imaging using radioactive iodine or technetium-99m is a useful diagnostic technique if gamma
camera facilities are available. The technique determines
whether there is unilateral or bilateral lobe involvement,
which is valuable if surgical thyroidectomy is to be performed (Figure 11.35). The technique also determines
11.33

Thyroid function tests
Increased serum basal thyroid hormone concentrations
are diagnostic of hyperthyroidism. In the majority of
cases both serum T4 and T3 concentrations are increased,
often markedly; however, in a few cases serum T3 concentrations are in the normal range despite obvious elevation of the serum T4 concentration. There is, therefore,
usually no advantage in determining serum T3 concentrations and serum total or free T4 concentrations provide a reliable indication of hyperthyroidism.
About 5% of cases of hyperthyroidism have serum thyroid hormone concentrations within reference intervals
at the time of examination and this may be due to an
early stage of the disease, significant daily fluctuations of
thyroid hormone concentrations, or the effect of concurrent nonthyroidal illness. In cases where hyperthyroidism is still suspected on clinical grounds, a diagnostic T4
concentration may be obtained by re-testing the animal
in 3–6 weeks. Alternative diagnostic tests for equivocal
cases of hyperthyroidism include the TRH stimulation
test and the T3 suppression test.

K22463_C011.indd 406

Figure 11.33 Lateral thoracic radiograph of a 12-year-old
Domestic Shorthair cat with hyperthyroidism and hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Note the cardiac silhouette is not enlarged.
11.34

LV

Figure 11.34 Short-axis 2D echocardiogram from the cat in
Figure 11.33 showing the degree of concentric hypertrophy and
the reduction in the size of the left ventricular lumen (LV).

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

11.35

Figure 11.35 Thyroid scan using technetium-99m of a cat with
hyperthyroidism. The head is seen to the left, with uptake in
the salivary glands. The greatest uptake of technetium is by the
thyroid adenoma (arrow).

any alteration in the position of the thyroid gland, the
rare case of abnormal ectopic thyroid tissue within the
thorax, or the presence of distant metastases from a functioning thyroid carcinoma.

Management
There are four options for treatment of hyperthyroidism:
dietary management, medical management (antithyroid
medication), surgical thyroidectomy, and radioactive
iodine.

Dietary management
The release of a prescription diet with very low-iodine
content (Hills y/d) in 2011 marked a new development
in the management of feline hyperthyroidism; however,
long-term, independent studies are required to fully
appreciate its advantages and limitations. The diet must
be used as the sole food source for the affected cat, as even
small quantities of other foods (including milk) are likely
to make the diet ineffective. The diet must not be used as
the sole food source for healthy cats, which may restrict
its use in multicat households. In addition, the diet must
not be used at the same time as antithyroid medication
or radio-iodine as hypothyroidism may result. The diet
needs up to 14 weeks to work, so for cats that are s­ eriously
ill with hyperthyroidism, conventional management
would be preferred.
The diet does not treat the underlying adenoma,
which will get bigger and more able to produce thyroid
hormone. Ultimately, the adenoma is likely to ‘break
through’ and conventional medical, surgical, or radioactive iodine treatment will be needed. However, for mildly
affected animals this may to be an effective treatment.
Monitoring serum total T4 concentrations is essential to
judge the effect of therapy.

K22463_C011.indd 407

407

Medical management
Medical management of hyperthyroidism using antithyroid drugs is indicated when preparing hyperthyroid
cats for surgical thyroidectomy in order to improve their
general condition and reduce the risk of complications
arising during or following surgery. Antithyroid drugs
are also recommended for the initial treatment of hyperthyroid cats with concurrent azotemia in order to ascertain whether significant deterioration in renal function is
likely to occur after medical control of the hyperthyroid
state. If there is no deterioration in renal function after
3–4 weeks of treatment, surgical thyroidectomy or radioactive iodine therapy for hyperthyroidism can be considered. Antithyroid drugs can also be used for long-term
management of hyperthyroidism, particularly in cases
where owners refuse surgical treatment.
Carbimazole and methimazole inhibit thyroid
­hormone synthesis. Carbimazole is the antithyroid drug
most widely used in Europe and methimazole is the most
widely used antithyroid drug in the USA and elsewhere.
They are a safe and effective form of treatment and are
­undoubtedly the treatment of choice for aged cats and
those with concurrent disease. Carbimazole is ­rapidly converted to ­methimazole after oral administration.
Carbimazole is initially administered at a dose of 5 mg
PO q8h, whereas methimazole is given at a dose of 2.5 mg
PO q12h and subsequently titrated to effect. Serum total
thyroxine concentrations decrease to within the reference range after 3–15 days. Within 2 weeks the dose of
carbimazole can be reduced in most cats to 5 mg PO q12h
and for methimazole to 2.5 mg PO q24h. These doses can
usually be continued for the remainder of the cat’s life.
Periodic assessment of thyroid hormone is necessary to
confirm that the hyperthyroid state is being adequately
controlled. Adjustment of the dosage is required in some
cases to maintain the euthyroid state. A slow-release form
of carbimazole, which only requires once daily administration, is available in some countries.
Adverse reactions to carbimazole and methimazole
include anorexia, vomiting, and lethargy, which are usually transient, but more serious reactions such as pruritus, self-induced excoriation, hepatopathy, jaundice, and
bleeding diatheses have been reported and necessitate
withdrawal of these drugs.

Surgical management
The aim of surgical thyroidectomy is to remove all of the
abnormally functioning thyroid tissue. Surgical thyroidectomy is a highly effective treatment for feline hyperthyroidism, but it can be associated with significant
morbidity and mortality if cats are not carefully assessed
and stabilized prior to surgery. Preoperative treatment

25/04/16 11:03 pm

408

Diseases of specific organ systems

with carbimazole or methimazole and propranolol
(2.5–5 mg PO q8h for 7–14 days before surgery) will control
the excessive thyroid hormone production and protect the
heart against the effects of excess thyroid hormone.
The anesthetic protocol for the hyperthyroid cat should
be carefully considered, using agents that have the minimum effect on cardiac rhythm. Techniques for unilateral
and bilateral thyroidectomy have been reported for cats
with hyperthyroidism. Both intracapsular and extracapsular techniques have been designed to preserve parathyroid function after removal of the abnormal thyroid
tissue.
The potential complications associated with thyroidectomy include hypoparathyroidism, Horner’s syndrome,
and laryngeal paralysis. The most serious complication
is hypocalcemia associated with d
­ amage to, or removal
of, the parathyroid glands. Since only one parathyroid
gland is required for maintenance of n
­ ormocalcemia,
hypoparathyroidism is mostly identified in cats treated
by bilateral thyroidectomy. Hypocalcemia is usually transient and may be manifested by c­linical signs including anorexia, vocalization, lethargy, m
­ uscular tremors,
tetany, and ­
­
convulsions. The treatment of postoperative ­hypocalcemia is outlined in Table 11.9.

Radioactive iodine therapy
Radioactive iodine therapy is a safe and effective method
of treating hyperthyroidism; however, it does require
the cat to be housed in licensed premises with restricted
access until the radiation dose rate has decreased to an
acceptable level. This usually requires hospitalization for
around 4 weeks, depending on local laws on the use of
radioisotopes. The radioisotope used most c­ ommonly is
iodine-131 (131I), which has a half-life of 8 days and
emits both beta-particles and gamma-radiation. The
­beta-particles cause most of the required tissue damage.

Radioactive iodine can be administered subcutaneously
and has not been associated with any adverse reactions.

DISORDERS OF THE PARATHYROID GLAND
The normal dog or cat usually has four small parathyroid
glands. One pair of glands is generally found in the fascia cranial to each of the thyroid lobes. The caudal pair
of parathyroid glands is embedded in the parenchyma of
each thyroid lobe. The location and number of the parathyroid glands can vary. Each parathyroid gland contains
chief cells, which synthesize and secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH).
PTH secretion is controlled by the ­
serum-ionized
calcium concentration in order to maintain the
­
serum-­
­
ionized c­alcium within narrow limits. If the
serum-ionized calcium concentration falls below the
set point (reference range: dog, 1.2–1.5 mmol/l [4.8–6.0
mg/dl]; cat, 1.1–1.4 mmol/l [4.4–5.6 mg/dl]), PTH release
is enhanced. Concentrations of serum-ionized calcium
above the set point inhibit PTH secretion. Total serum
calcium consists of ionized and protein-bound calcium.
Although serum protein-bound calcium is affected by
several factors, including the circulating albumin concentration and the acid–base status, it is only the ionized
calcium that is physiologically active. It is important to
appreciate this, since most laboratories only measure
total serum calcium.
PTH tends to increase serum-ionized calcium concentrations through a number of integrated actions. In the
kidney, PTH increases tubular reabsorption of calcium
and enhances renal excretion of phosphate. PTH also
activates 1-alpha-hydroxylase, the renal enzyme that
converts 25-hydroxy-cholecalciferol to the active form
of vitamin D, 1,25-dihydroxy-cholecalciferol (calcitriol).
Increased
circulating
1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol

Table 11.9 Management of postoperative hypocalcemia.
Immediate therapy
•• Administer 1.0–1.5 ml/kg of 10% calcium gluconate or calcium glubionate by slow intravenous injection
•• Stop injection if bradycardia develops. Repeat as necessary
Maintenance therapy
•• Begin oral supplementation as soon as possible using 50–75 mg/kg/day of calcium equivalent in three or four divided doses
(equivalent to 500–750 mg/kg/day of calcium gluconate or 400–600 mg/kg/day of calcium lactate) and 0.03 mg/kg/day of
dihydrotachysterol or 0.05 µg/kg/day of alfacalcidol (calcitrol)
•• Monitor the serum calcium concentration and decrease the dihydrotachysterol by 0.01 mg/kg every other day or alfacalcidol by
0.01 µg/kg every other day once serum calcium is within the reference range. Adjust doses of dihydrotachysterol or alfacalcidol
and calcium supplementation according to subsequent serum calcium concentrations. In most cases, hypocalcemia is temporary

K22463_C011.indd 408

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

409

enhances calcium and phosphate absorption by the
intestine. In bone, PTH promotes the release of calcium
and phosphate into the extracellular fluid by stimulating osteoclast and osteocyte activity and by suppressing
osteoblastic activity. The combination of calcium mobilization from bone and retention of calcium by the kidneys
causes the serum-ionized calcium concentration to rise.
Calcium plays an important role in neuromuscular
excitability, membrane permeability, muscle contraction,
enzyme activity, hormone release, and blood coagulation,
as well as acting as an essential structural component of
the skeleton.

neuromuscular abnormalities that develop secondary
to hypocalcemia and include seizures, focal trembling
or twitching, generalized muscle f­asciculations, ataxia,
stiff gait, weakness, panting, anorexia, and lethargy.
The fact that the clinical signs tend to be intermittent,
often precipitated by exercise, excitement, or stress, suggests a physiologic adaptation to severe hypocalcemia.
Posterior lenticular cataract formation can occur secondary to hypocalcemia in dogs and cats (Figure 11.36).
Electrocardiography may show prolongation of QT interval in some cases of hypoparathyroidism.

HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

(See Table 11.10.)

Differential diagnosis

Definition/overview

Diagnosis

Hypoparathyroidism is caused by inadequate production
and secretion of PTH (primary hypoparathyroidism) or,
more rarely, by deficient end-organ responsiveness to circulating PTH (pseudohypoparathyroidism).

Profound hypocalcemia (serum total calcium <2 mmol/l
[<8 mg/dl]) and severe hyperphosphatemia (serum phosphate >1.3 mmol/l [>4 mg/dl]) with normal renal function
(blood urea and serum creatinine) are found in cases of
primary hypoparathyroidism.
PTH assays are available and have been validated for
use in the dog and cat. Inappropriately low plasma PTH
concentration in a hypocalcemic animal is diagnostic of
primary hypoparathyroidism. Careful sample handling
is essential to avoid erroneous results, since PTH is heat
labile. Simultaneous measurement of serum calcium and
PTH is essential in order to be able to interpret the PTH
result.

Etiology
The two most common causes of primary hypoparathyroidism are iatrogenic injury or removal of the parathyroid glands during thyroidectomy (see p. 407) and
idiopathic hypoparathyroidism due to destruction and
atrophy of the parathyroid glands. Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism probably results from immune-mediated
destruction of the parathyroid glands, and this is supported by the diffuse lymphocytic infiltration found in
the parathyroid glands of some affected animals.

11.36

Pathophysiology
Cessation of gland activity results in increased plasma
phosphate concentrations and decreased serum calcium
concentrations. Loss of PTH leads to changes in calcium
and phosphate mobilization from bone, increased intestinal absorption of calcium and phosphate, and retention
of calcium and enhanced renal excretion of phosphate.
Neuronal membrane permeability is increased when
extracellular calcium ion concentrations are below normal and the nervous system becomes more excitable.
Spontaneous discharge of nerve fibers initiates impulses to
peripheral skeletal muscles, causing tetanic contractions.

Clinical presentation
Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism is rare, but it has been
reported in the dog and cat. The disease affects young
to middle aged animals of various breeds. A female bias
has been reported in dogs. The clinical signs relate to

K22463_C011.indd 409

Figure 11.36 Lenticular cataracts in a Springer Spaniel with
primary hypoparathyroidism.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

410

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 11.10 Differential diagnosis of hypocalcemia.

11.37

Primary hypoparathyroidism
Chronic kidney disease*
Hypoalbuminemia*
Intestinal malabsorption*
Acute pancreatitis*
Eclampsia
Acute kidney injury
Ethylene glycol toxicity
Phosphate-containing enemas
* Not usually associated with clinical signs of tetany

Management
The treatment protocol for hypocalcemia is outlined in
Table 11.9; similar principles are used when treating
dogs and cats. Parenteral calcium preparations should
be used as emergency therapy to correct hypocalcemic
tetany. Maintenance therapy using calcium and vitamin
D supplementation must be tailored to the individual
patient and the dose adjusted according to the serum
calcium concentration. Dihydrotachysterol (commercial
availability varies) supplementation can prove expensive in larger dogs. Vitamin D2 (1,000–6,000 IU/kg/day),
alfacalcidol (0.05 µg/kg/day), or calcitriol (0.03–0.06 µg/
kg/day) may be used as alternatives. These starting doses
may need to be exceeded to bring the serum calcium into
the reference range.
With adequate monitoring of the serum calcium concentration, the prognosis in cases of primary hypoparathyroidism is usually excellent, but supplementation is
usually required for life.

HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
Definition/overview
Hyperparathyroidism is caused by excess production
and secretion of PTH, which can be primary or secondary. Primary hyperparathyroidism is an uncommon
disease of older dogs and cats. There is no sex predisposition, but there is a breed predilection as the Keeshond is
overrepresented.

Etiology
Primary hyperparathyroidism is a disorder resulting from autonomous and excessive secretion of PTH
by one or more of the parathyroid glands. Secondary
hyperparathyroidism is an adaptive increase in PTH
­
secretion as a result of chronic stimulation from conditions that tend to reduce the concentration of ionized
calcium in plasma. Secondary hyperparathyroidism may
occur as a result of chronic kidney disease (see Chapter 12:

K22463_C011.indd 410

Figure 11.37 Necropsy specimen from a Dachshund that had
several endocrinopathies. Shown are both thyroid glands, with
one containing a parathyroid adenoma. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Nephrology/urology) and calcium deficiency during
growth (see Chapter 14: Disorders of the nervous system
and muscle).
Primary hyperparathyroidism is most commonly
caused by a small solitary parathyroid adenoma
(Figure 11.37). PTH excess may also be caused by
­nodular hyperplasia in one or more parathyroid glands.
Very rarely the disease is caused by a parathyroid carcinoma. The Keeshond has an autosomal dominant
form of p
­ rimary hyperparathyroidism that has partial
­age-dependent penetrance.

Pathophysiology
The normal negative feedback control regulating calcium
concentration is lost by the entry of excess calcium into
the extracellular fluid. The kidneys lose their ability to
excrete the excess calcium and are unable efficiently to
reabsorb sodium and water.

Clinical presentation
The clinical signs in hyperparathyroidism are variable. The disease may be asymptomatic or may result in
mild to severe systemic illness. The clinical signs relate
to hypercalcemia and include polyuria, polydipsia,
anorexia, vomiting, depression, muscle weakness, constipation, and weight loss. Urinary calculi can occur. Clinical
examination may reveal bradycardia. The small size of
the parathyroid lesions means that the nodules are rarely
palpable.

Differential diagnosis
(See Table 11.11.)

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

Diagnosis
Laboratory findings
Hypercalcemia (serum total calcium >3 mmol/l [>12 mg/
dl]) and hypophosphatemia (serum phosphate concentration <1.3 mmol/l [<4 mg/dl]) are found in cases of primary hyperparathyroidism provided that renal function
is normal. Prolonged increases in the circulating calcium
concentration will facilitate calcium deposition in the
kidneys, causing renal function to deteriorate and serum
phosphate concentrations to rise. If renal failure develops, primary hyperparathyroidism is difficult to differentiate from secondary renal hyperparathyroidism.
Circulating PTH concentrations are inappropriately
increased in animals with primary hyperparathyroidism. A PTH assay provides a useful differentiation in
hypercalcemic patients because plasma PTH concentrations are low in dogs with cancer-associated hypercalcemia. Careful handling of the sample is essential to avoid
erroneous results, since PTH is heat labile. Plasma PTHrelated protein (PTH-rp) concentrations are elevated in
most cases of cancer-associated hypercalcemia, but are
low in primary hyperparathyroidism.

Diagnostic imaging
Ultrasonographic examination of the parathyroid glands
is useful in the evaluation of hypercalcemic dogs and can
be used to identify hyperplastic parathyroid glands and
parathyroid adenomas (Figures 11.38–11.40). Ultrasound
examination of the kidneys in the dog may also reveal
the hyperechoic medullary band characteristic of nephrocalcinosis (Figure 11.41). This medullary band may be
seen in normal cats.

Management
Treatment of the hypercalcemic crisis
The hypercalcemic crisis should be treated by aggressive IV fluid therapy using 0.9% sodium chloride solution. Saline will restore the circulating fluid volume

411

and promote calcium excretion. Furosemide (2–4 mg/kg
IV q12h) may also be administered to enhance calcium
excretion. Bisphosphonates are osteoclast inhibitors and
have also been used in dogs to control hypercalcemia.
Clodronate, etidronate, alendronate, and pamidronate
have been used; disodium etidronate (5 mg/kg PO q24h)
has been used most frequently in the dog and alendronate (5–10 mg/cat/week) in the cat.

Surgical treatment
Primary hyperparathyroidism should be resolved following parathyroidectomy. Parathyroid adenomas are
usually easily identified and removed (Figure 11.42).
Postoperative complications include hypocalcemia, since
the remaining parathyroid glands may be atrophic and
require a period of adaptation before control of circulating calcium is regained. For this reason, it is advisable to
begin supplementation with vitamin D (dihydrotachysterol or alfacalcidol) and calcium gluconate 24 hours
before surgery in those patients with calcium concentrations >3.75 mmol/l (>15 mg/dl).

DISORDERS OF THE ADRENAL GLANDS
The adrenal glands are located craniomedially to each
kidney in retroperitoneal fat. Each gland consists of a
cortex and a medulla. The cortex completely surrounds
the medulla and consists of three distinct zones: the outer
zona glomerulosa, the middle zona fasciculata, and the
inner zona reticularis.
The adrenal cortex produces about 30 different hormones, many of which have little or no clinical significance. The hormones can be divided into three groups

11.38

Table 11.11 Differential diagnosis of hypercalcemia.
Cancer-associated hypercalcemia:
•• Lymphoproliferative disease
•• Apocrine cell adenocarcinoma of the anal sac
•• Multiple myeloma
•• Other solid tumors
Hypoadrenocorticism
Chronic kidney disease
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Granulomatous diseases (e.g. the systemic mycoses)
Vitamin D intoxication

K22463_C011.indd 411

Figure 11.38 This ultrasound image shows a large parathyroid
adenoma at the cranial aspect of the right thyroid gland.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 11:03 pm

412

Diseases of specific organ systems

11.39

11.41

11.40

Figures 11.39, 11.40
(11.39) Ultrasonogram
of the cervical region
showing a large cystic
parathyroid adenoma
at the cranial pole of
a thyroid lobe. (11.40)
Surgical specimen
showing the similarity to
the image. (Courtesy
M. Schaer)

11.42

Figure 11.41 Ultrasonogram of the kidney of a Labrador
Retriever with hypercalcemic nephropathy. Note the echogenic
rim in the medulla (arrowheads).

Figure 11.42 Parathyroid adenoma adjacent to the thyroid
gland being pointed out at surgery.

based on their predominant actions: mineralocorticoids,
which are important in electrolyte and water homeostasis; glucocorticoids, which promote gluconeogenesis; and
small quantities of sex hormones, particularly male hormones that have weak androgenic activity. Aldosterone is
the most important mineralocorticoid and is produced by
the zona glomerulosa. The principal glucocorticoid (cortisol) and the sex hormones are produced in the zonae fasciculata and reticularis.
Glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid release are controlled by different mechanisms. Glucocorticoid release
is controlled almost entirely by ACTH secreted by the
anterior lobe of the pituitary, which in turn is regulated by corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) from
the hypothalamus (Figure 11.43). CRH is secreted by the
neurons in the anterior portion of the paraventricular
nuclei within the hypothalamus, and it is transported to

the anterior pituitary by the portal circulation, where it
stimulates ACTH release. There is probably an internal or
‘short loop’ negative feedback control by ACTH on CRH.
ACTH secreted into the systemic circulation causes cortisol release, with concentrations rising almost immediately. Cortisol has direct negative feedback effects on the
hypothalamus (decreases formation of CRH) and on the
anterior lobe of the pituitary (decreases the formation
of ACTH). These feedback mechanisms help regulate the
plasma concentration of cortisol.
Secretion of CRH and ACTH is normally episodic and
pulsatile, which results in fluctuating cortisol concentrations during the day. Diurnal variation is superimposed on this type of release. It is usually stated that in
the dog, CRH and ACTH, and thus cortisol concentrations,
are highest in the early hours of the morning and that
in the cat they are greatest in the evening. However, a

K22463_C011.indd 412

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

true circadian rhythm of cortisol concentrations has been
­difficult to confirm in the dog and cat. The episodic release
of CRH and ACTH is perpetuated by the reciprocal effect
of cortisol acting through negative feedback control. This
reciprocal arrangement does not hold during periods of
stress when both ACTH and cortisol are maintained at
high concentrations, because the effects of stress tend to
override the normal negative feedback control.
Aldosterone release is influenced primarily by the
renin–angiotensin system and by plasma potassium
concentrations (Figure 11.44). Renin is secreted into
the blood by the cells of the juxtaglomerular apparatus,
which consists of specialized cells in the wall of the afferent arteriole immediately proximal to the glomerulus and
the specialized epithelial cells of the distal convoluted
tubule adjacent to that arteriole, the macula densa. Renin
release may be stimulated by stretch receptors in the
juxtaglomerular apparatus in response to hypotension
or reduced renal blood flow, or by sodium and chloride
receptors in the macula densa. Renin is also released by
sympathetic nerve stimulation and is inhibited by angiotensin II, ADH, hypertension, and increased reabsorption
of sodium by the renal tubules.
Renin is an enzyme that splits circulating angiotensinogen, produced by the liver, into angiotensin I.
Angiotensin I is converted to angiotensin II by angiotensin-converting enzyme, which is located almost entirely
in the pulmonary capillary endothelium. Angiotensin
II is a powerful vasoconstrictor and it stimulates aldosterone secretion from the zona glomerulosa. Through

413

its action on the distal convoluted tubule, aldosterone
has a n
­ egative feedback effect on the juxtaglomerular
apparatus.
Potassium has a direct stimulatory effect on the zona
glomerulosa cells to release aldosterone. ACTH and
sodium play a less significant role in aldosterone secretion. ACTH is necessary to maintain normal aldosterone
output. In the absence of ACTH the zona glomerulosa partially atrophies, causing mild to moderate aldosterone
deficiency, whereas there is almost total loss of glucocorticoid synthesis and release.
The main function of aldosterone is to protect against
hypotension and potassium intoxication. Aldosterone
promotes sodium, chloride, and water reabsorption, as
well as potassium excretion, in many epithelial tissues
including the intestinal mucosa, salivary glands, sweat
glands, and kidneys. Its main site of action is the renal
tubule, where it promotes sodium and chloride reabsorption in the proximal convoluted tubule and sodium
reabsorption by exchange with potassium in the distal
convoluted tubule. It is one of the complex regulatory systems for the regulation of extracellular fluid electrolyte
concentrations, extracellular fluid volume, blood volume,
and arterial pressure.
11.44

Kidney

Angiotensinogen
Renin

Hypothalamus

11.43
Angiotensin I

Anterior
pituitary

CRH
Aldosterone

Negative
feedback
control

Angiotensin II

Vasoconstriction
ACTH

Cortisol

Adrenal
Adrenal
cortex

Figure 11.43 Physiology of the hypothalamic–pituitary–
adrenal axis.

K22463_C011.indd 413

Arteriole
Hyperkalemia

Figure 11.44 Physiology of the renin–angiotensin system.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

414

Diseases of specific organ systems

HYPOADRENOCORTICISM
Hypoadrenocorticism is a syndrome that results from
a deficiency of both glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid secretion from the adrenal cortices. Destruction of
more than 95% of both adrenal cortices causes a clinical
deficiency of all adrenocortical hormones and is termed
primary hypoadrenocorticism (Addison’s disease).
Secondary hypoadrenocorticism is caused by a deficiency
in ACTH, which leads to atrophy of the adrenal cortices
and impaired secretion of glucocorticoids. The production
of mineralocorticoids, however, usually remains sufficient to maintain normal electrolyte concentrations.

●● Other causes. Bilateral adrenalectomy, hemorrhage or
infarction of the adrenal cortex, or mycotic or neoplastic involvement of the adrenal glands can also lead to
adrenal insufficiency, but these are rare causes.
11.45

primary hypoadrenocorticism (addison’s
disease)
Definition/overview
Primary hypoadrenocorticism is caused by the ­destruction
or loss of the adrenal cortices. Addison’s disease occurs
more frequently in the dog than is recognized, but it is
much less common than hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing’s
disease). Hypoadrenocorticism is rare in the cat. The clinical signs, diagnosis, and treatment of hypoadrenocorticism in the dog and cat are similar.

11.46

Etiology
Primary hypoadrenocorticism in the dog has been associated with the following conditions:

●● Idiopathic adrenocortical insufficiency. This is the
most common cause in the dog and is thought to result
from immune-mediated destruction of the adrenal
cortex. The presence of antiadrenal antibodies in two
dogs and characteristic histopathologic findings in
another support this hypothesis (Figures 11.45-11.47).
In humans, hypoadrenocorticism has been found to
be associated with other immune-mediated endocrine disorders such as lymphocytic thyroiditis,
diabetes mellitus, hypoparathyroidism, primary
gonadal failure, and atrophic gastritis. A similar
autoimmune polyglandular disease has also been
recognized in dogs.
●● Mitotane-induced adrenocortical necrosis. Although
mitotane usually spares the zona glomerulosa and,
therefore, mineralocorticoid secretion, cases of complete adrenocortical failure can occasionally occur
(Figures 11.48) (see Hyperadrenocorticism).
●● Trilostane-associated
adrenocortical
necrosis.
Although trilostane is a competitive inhibitor of steroid synthesis, it can cause acute adrenal necrosis,
which can lead occasionally to complete adrenocortical failure (see Hyperadrenocorticism).

K22463_C011.indd 414

Figures 11.45, 11.46 These histopathologic specimens 11.47
are from a dog that had Addison’s disease. They show
adrenocortical atrophy and lymphocytic and plasmacytic
infiltrates within the cortex. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Figure 11.47 Indirect immunofluorescence stain of an adrenal
cortex template showing the positive reaction for antiadrenal
antibodies as illustrated with the bright yellow iridescence.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

11.48

415

hypothermia. The condition is rapidly progressive and
life-threatening. Aggressive fluid therapy will help most
patients and allow more time to make a diagnosis.

Chronic primary hypoadrenocorticism

Figure 11.48 This histopathologic specimen is from a
cushingoid dog that became toxic from mitotane therapy.
Shown is widespread adrenocortical necrosis. (Courtesy M.
Schaer)

Pathophysiology
Loss of or damage to the adrenal cortex leads to mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid deficiency. Aldosterone
is the major mineralocorticoid and deficiency causes
impaired ability to conserve sodium and water and failure to excrete potassium, leading to hyponatremia and
hyperkalemia. Hyponatremia induces lethargy, depres­
sion, and nausea and leads to the development of hypovolemia, hypotension, reduced cardiac output, and
decreased renal perfusion. Hyperkalemia causes muscle
weakness, hyporeflexia, and impaired cardiac conduction.
Glucocorticoid deficiency causes decreased tolerance to
stress, loss of a
­ ppetite, and a mild normocytic normochromic anemia.

Clinical presentation
There are no breed predilections, but the possibility of a
hereditary factor has been suggested in some breeds, for
example Standard Poodles, Bearded Collies, Portuguese
Water Dogs, Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retrievers, and
Leonbergers. Hypoadrenocorticism appears to be a disease of the young and middle aged dog, with an age
range of 3 months to 14 years and a median age of 4–5
years. Approximately 70% of reported cases are female.
The progression of adrenocortical insufficiency may be
acute or chronic. Chronic hypoadrenocorticism is far
more common than the acute disease in the dog.

Acute primary hypoadrenocorticism
The clinical appearance of the acute form is that of hypovolemic shock (adrenocortical crisis). The animal is usually found in a state of collapse or collapses when stressed.
Other signs include a weak pulse, profound bradycardia,
abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration, and

K22463_C011.indd 415

The clinical signs in the chronic form are often vague and
nonspecific (Table 11.12). The diagnosis should be considered in any dog with a waxing and waning type of illness
or who shows episodic weakness and collapse. The most
consistent clinical signs include anorexia, vomiting, lethargy, depression, and/or weakness. The severity of each
sign can vary during the course of the disease and may
be interspersed with periods of apparent good health,
often following nonspecific veterinary therapy, usually consisting of corticosteroid medication and/or fluid
administration. Other common clinical signs include
­
dehydration, bradycardia, and weak femoral pulses. In a
few cases, severe GI hemorrhage can occur resulting in
profound anemia.

Differential diagnosis
Chronic renal insufficiency, primary neuromuscular
disorders, diseases that cause weight loss, weakness,
anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea.

Diagnosis
Laboratory findings
The most common laboratory findings are listed in
Table 11.13. Hematologic changes may include lymphocytosis, eosinophilia, and mild normocytic, normochromic nonregenerative anemia. However, these findings
are not as consistent as those changes seen in hyperadrenocorticism. Normal or elevated eosinophil and
Table 11.12 Clinical signs of primary hypoadrenocorticism
(in approximate decreasing order of frequency).
Anorexia
Lethargy/depression
Vomiting
Weakness
Weight loss
Waxing/waning course
Dehydration
Diarrhea
Previous response to therapy
Collapse
Hypothermia
Slow capillary refill time
Shaking
Polyuria/polydipsia
Melena
Weak pulse
Bradycardia (<60 bpm)

25/04/16 11:03 pm

416

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 11.13 Laboratory findings in primary
hypoadrenocorticism.
Hematology
Lymphocytosis
Eosinophilia
Relative neutropenia
Anemia (usually a normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia, but can be blood loss anemia associated with GI
hemorrhage)
Biochemistry
Azotemia
Hyponatremia (<135 mmol/l [<135 mEq/l])
Hyperkalemia (>5.5 mmol/l [5.5 mEq/l])
Reduced sodium:potassium ratio (<25:1)
Reduced bicarbonate and total CO2 concentrations
Hypochloremia
Hypercalcemia
Hypoglycemia
Urinalysis
Specific gravity variable (usually 1.015–1.030)
Endocrine testing
Low basal serum cortisol concentration with a failure to
stimulate in response to ACTH administration
Raised plasma ACTH concentration

lymphocyte counts in an ill animal with signs compatible
with hypoadrenocorticism are significant, because the
expected response to stress is eosinopenia and lymphopenia. The mild anemia may not be obvious until the dog
has been rehydrated, since dehydration may mask the
anemia.
The most consistent laboratory findings in hypoadrenocorticism are prerenal azotemia, hypocholesterolemia,
hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia. Blood urea and serum
creatinine and phosphate concentrations are increased as
a result of reduced renal perfusion and decreased glomerular filtration rate. Reduced renal perfusion results from
hypovolemia, reduced cardiac output, and hypotension,
which in turn result from chronic fluid loss through the
kidneys, acute fluid loss through vomiting and/or diarrhea, and inadequate fluid intake.
Prerenal azotemia is usually associated with concentrated urine (SG >1.030), whereas the urine in primary
renal failure is often isosthenuric or only mildly concentrated (1.008–1.025). However, some severe cases of
hypoadrenocorticism may develop impaired concentrating ability because the chronic sodium loss reduces the
renal medullary concentration gradient. Therefore, the
laboratory findings may resemble those of chronic ­kidney

K22463_C011.indd 416

disease. With adequate fluid therapy the blood urea will
return to normal in cases of hypoadrenocorticism.
Sodium concentration is usually <135 mmol/l (<135
mEq/l) and potassium concentration >5.5 mmol/l (>5.5
mEq/l). The ratio of sodium to potassium may be more
reliable than the absolute values. The normal ratio
of sodium to potassium varies between 27:1 and 40:1,
whereas in patients with hypoadrenocorticism the ratio
is commonly less than 25:1 and may be below 20:1, however, there are other medical disorders that can produce
a similar serum electrolyte pattern. Blood samples must
be collected before IV fluids are administered, otherwise the electrolyte concentrations can quickly return
to normal. Despite this, approximately 10% of cases
may have normal electrolyte concentrations (referred
to by some authors as atypical) at the time of presentation and these are usually thought to be early cases of
hypoadrenocorticism.
Mild to moderate hypercalcemia is seen in about
one-third of cases of hypoadrenocorticism, usually
those dogs that are most severely affected by the disease. Hypercalcemia is caused by hemoconcentration,
increased renal tubular reabsorption, and decreased glomerular filtration.
Cases of hypoadrenocorticism have a tendency to
develop hypoglycemia because glucocorticoid deficiency
reduces glucose production by the liver and peripheral
cell receptors become more sensitive to insulin. Severe
hypoglycemia is uncommon, but the potential should
remain a concern for the clinician.

Electrocardiographic findings
Hyperkalemia impairs cardiac excitation and conduction, which can be assessed by an ECG examination
(Figure 11.49). Although the ECG changes do not correlate
directly with serum potassium levels, the guidelines shown
in Table 11.14 have proved helpful. Changes in the ECG can
also be used for monitoring the patient during treatment.

Radiographic findings
Dogs with hypoadrenocorticism may show radiographic
signs of hypovolemia, which include microcardia,
decreased size of pulmonary vessels, and reduced size
of the caudal vena cava (Figure 11.50). The changes
are not specific and only represent changes associated
with hypovolemia and dehydration, irrespective of the
cause. A few dogs with hypoadrenocorticism develop
esophageal dilatation as a result of generalized muscle
weakness and this can be seen on thoracic radiographs
(Figure 11.51).

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

417

11.51

11.49
II

Bearded collie: Na 138 mmol/l, K 9.5 mmol/l
II

Bearded collie: Na 142 mmol/l, K 5.9 mmol/l

Figure 11.49 Electrocardiogram of an addisonian crisis. Note
the slow ventricular rate and absence of P waves. The serum
potassium was 9.5 mmol/l (9.5 mEq/l). Shown are the pre- and
post-treatment electrocardiograms.
Figure 11.51 Lateral thoracic radiograph of a Dobermann with
hypoadrenocorticism. A barium swallow has been performed to
show a megaesophagus, which resolved following treatment of
the hypoadrenocorticism.

Table 11.14 ECG changes with hyperkalemia

Endocrine testing

>5.5 mmol/l (>5.5 mEq/l) – peaking of the T wave,
­shortening of the Q-T interval
>6.5 mmol/l (>6.5 mEql/l) – increased QRS duration
>7.0 mmol/l (>7.0 mEq/l) – P wave amplitude decreased, P-R
interval prolonged
>8.5 mmol/l (>8.5 mEq/l) – P wave absent, severe bradycardia (sinoventricular rhythm)

11.50

The ACTH stimulation test (Figure 11.52) is commonly
used to confirm the presence of hypoadrenocorticism; the
protocol is described in Table 11.15. The IV preparation of
ACTH (tetracosactin [cosyntropin in the USA]) should be
used, as absorption by other routes cannot be relied on if
the patient is collapsed or dehydrated. The ACTH stimulation test, however, does not distinguish between primary
and secondary hypoadrenocorticism. While aldosterone
concentrations pre- and post-ACTH are not routinely
measured, they may be useful in addition to cortisol concentrations in those cases with normal electrolyte concentrations (so-called atypical hypoadrenocorticism) to
determine whether mineralocorticoid supplementation
is likely to be indicated.
Plasma ACTH concentrations are required to differentiate primary and secondary hypoadrenocorticism.
Plasma ACTH concentrations are low in secondary
hypoadrenocorticism and markedly raised in primary
hypoadrenocorticism.

Management
Acute primary hypoadrenocorticism

Figure 11.50 Lateral thoracic radiograph of a Bearded
Collie with hypoadrenocorticism showing microcardia due to
dehydration and hypovolemia.

K22463_C011.indd 417

Aggressive IV fluid therapy using 0.9% saline should be
used in the acute crisis to treat the hyperkalemia, which
is life-threatening. Once stabilized, 0.45% saline may be
used since the serum sodium should not be increased by
more than 8–12 mmol/l (8–12 mEq/l) per 24 hours in order
to avoid causing central pontine myelinosis (osmotic
demyelination). This is particularly important when the

25/04/16 11:03 pm

418

Diseases of specific organ systems

Cortisol nmol/l (μg/dl)

11.52

1,400 (50.7)
1,200 (43.4)
1,000 (36.2)
800 (29.0)
600 (21.7)
400 (14.5)
200 (7.2)
0
Pre-ACTH

Post-ACTH

Hyperadrenocorticism
Normal
latrogenic hyperadrenocorticism
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison’s disease)

Figure 11.52 ACTH stimulation test.
Table 11.15 Protocol for endocrine testing for
hypoadrenocorticism.
ACTH stimulation test
Protocol:
•• Collect 3 ml plasma or serum sample for basal cortisol
concentration*
•• Inject 0.25 mg of synthetic ACTH (tetracosactrin; Synacthen,
Ciba) IV in dogs >5 kg. Use only 0.125 mg in dogs <5 kg
•• Collect a second sample for cortisol concentration
30–60 minutes later
*The recent administration of glucocorticoids, such as
hydrocortisone, prednisolone, or prednisone, may result in
elevated cortisol concentrations due to cross-reactivity in
many cortisol assays. For this reason these glucocorticoids
should be withheld for at least 24 hours before testing.
There is no cross-reactivity with dexamethasone, although
dexamethasone will suppress cortisol concentrations in
patients with an intact hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis
Interpretation:
•• In normal dogs, pre-ACTH cortisol concentrations are
usually between 20 and 250 nmol/l (0.7 and 9.1 µg/dl),
with post-ACTH cortisol concentrations between 200 and
450 nmol/l (7.2 and 16.3 µg/dl)
•• Reduced responses to ACTH are also seen in primary
hypoadrenocorticism (Addison’s disease). Usually both
pre- and post-ACTH cortisol concentrations are <20 nmol/l
(<0.7 µg/dl)

K22463_C011.indd 418

serum sodium level is <120 mmol/l (<120 mEq/l). The
response to treatment is predictable and often dramatic,
while acute kidney injury will slow down the improvement process. Glucose and insulin therapy or calcium
administration are therefore not usually required for the
treatment of hyperkalemia due to hypoadrenocorticism,
unless there are life-threatening ECG abnormalities such
as atrial standstill or the appearance of sine waves. The
serum potassium falls because of the dilution effect of
the saline and the improvement in renal perfusion. The
increased renal blood flow allows further excretion of
potassium into the urine.
Glucocorticoid therapy should be used early in the
treatment of the acute crisis. Once the animal has
improved with saline and glucocorticoids, maintenance
therapy with mineralocorticoids can be instigated
(see below). Glucocorticoids of choice in the acute crisis
include:

●● Hydrocortisone sodium succinate (10 mg/kg IV
repeated every 3–6 hours or a CRI of 0.5 mg/kg/hour).

●● Prednisolone sodium succinate (5 mg/kg IV repeated
every 3–6 hours).

●● Dexamethasone sodium phosphate (0.5–1.0 mg/kg IV
given once).
If plasma cortisol concentrations are to be measured for
the diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism, dexamethasone
should be used, as the other preparations cross-react with
cortisol in the assay.

Chronic primary hypoadrenocorticism
(maintenance therapy)
Fludrocortisone acetate is an oral synthetic adrenocortical steroid with mineralocorticoid effects. It is the
treatment of choice for maintenance therapy in the
dog. An initial dose of 15 µg/kg/day of fludrocortisone
is given and serum electrolytes measured after 5–7 days.
The dose rate should then be adjusted until the sodium
and potassium concentrations are within the reference
range. The daily maintenance dose required is usually between 15 and 30 µg/kg. The dose often has to be
increased during the first 6–18 months of therapy and
the drug may need to be administered twice daily in
some cases. Desoxycorticosterone pivalate, a long-acting
ester of desoxycorticosterone, can be used as an alternative. The dose is 2 mg/kg IM or SC q25days (lower doses
and longer treatment intervals can be efficacious in
some dogs).
Daily glucocorticoid supplementation is not required
after initial treatment with fludrocortisone acetate in

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

the majority of cases, as fludrocorticosone has some
glucocorticoid activity. However, the owners of animals
with hypoadrenocorticism should be given a supply of
prednisolone tablets to be administered if the patient
appears unwell. Prednisolone at a dose of 0.1–0.2 mg/kg
daily should be sufficient as a physiologic replacement
for those cases that do require glucocorticoid medication.
Salt supplementation using salt tablets or salting the
food should be instigated initially to help correct hyponatremia, but this can be gradually reduced and phased
out as it is not usually required long term. However,
dogs requiring unusually high doses of fludrocortisone may respond to oral salt and fewer fludrocortisone
tablets.
The prognosis for primary hypoadrenocorticism is
generally excellent providing owner education is adequate. Hypoadrenocorticism can occur in conjunction
with other endocrine deficiencies, such as hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus and hypoparathyroidism, or with
other immune-mediated diseases, such as immune-mediated hemolytic anemia or thrombocytopenia.

Secondary hypoadrenocorticism
Definition/overview
Secondary hypoadrenocorticism is associated with a deficiency of glucocorticoids caused by a deficiency in ACTH
production and/or release. The production of mineralocorticoids, although reduced, generally remains adequate. Secondary hypoadrenocorticism occurs in both
dogs and cats.

Etiology
Secondary hypoadrenocorticism can be associated with
destructive lesions (e.g. nonfunctional tumors) in the
hypothalamus or anterior pituitary. More commonly, however, the condition is iatrogenic, with clinical signs occurring after the cessation of glucocorticoid therapy. In these
cases, secondary hypoadrenocorticism is caused by prolonged suppression of ACTH secretion from glucocorticoid
therapy. In the cat, secondary hypoadrenocorticism is also
seen following prolonged megestrol acetate therapy.

Pathophysiology
Destructive lesions in the pituitary or hypothalamus
may result in deficiencies of several pituitary hormones,
including ACTH. Alternatively, exogenous glucocorticoid administration may suppress ACTH production and
release. Both situations result in atrophy of the adrenal cortices and decreased glucocorticoid synthesis and
release.

K22463_C011.indd 419

419

Clinical presentation
The clinical signs are variable and may include depression, anorexia, occasional vomiting or diarrhea, a weak
pulse, and sudden collapse when stressed. If the secondary hypoadrenocorticism is associated with cessation
of glucocorticoid therapy, clinical signs of iatrogenic
hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing’s disease) are usually
­
present.

Differential diagnosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis, septic peritonitis, acute necrotizing
pancreatitis.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on a failure of the animal’s cortisol levels to respond to ACTH stimulation.

Management
Glucocorticoid replacement using prednisolone (0.1–0.2
mg/kg q24h) is indicated for immediate correction of
the clinical signs. Further treatment and the prognosis
depend on the cause and whether glucocorticoid therapy
can be eliminated.

HYPERADRENOCORTICISM (CUSHING’S
DISEASE)
Definition/overview
Hyperadrenocorticism is associated with excessive production or administration of glucocorticoids and is one of
the most commonly diagnosed endocrinopathies in the
dog. Hyperadrenocorticism is rare in the cat.

Etiology
Hyperadrenocorticism can be spontaneous or iatrogenic. Spontaneously occurring hyperadrenocorticism may be associated with inappropriate secretion
of ACTH by the pituitary (pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism [PDH]) or with a primary adrenal
disorder ­
(adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism)
(Figure 11.53).

Pathophysiology
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
PDH accounts for 80–85% of dogs and the majority of
cats with naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism.
Excessive ACTH secretion results in bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia and increased cortisol secretion. There is
a failure of the negative feedback mechanism of cortisol
on ACTH. However, episodic secretion of ACTH results in

25/04/16 11:03 pm

420

Diseases of specific organ systems

11.54

11.53
? Increased CRH
release
? Failure of negative
feedback control

? Adenoma
ACTH

ACTH

Cortisol

Cortisol

A

B

Figure 11.53 Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (A);
adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (B).

fluctuating cortisol concentrations that may at times be
within the normal range. The presence of excessive cortisol secretion can be confirmed by measuring urine cortisol excretion over a 24-hour period.
Pathologic changes in PDH include microadenomas and macroadenomas of the corticotroph cells and
a primary failure of the negative feedback response.
Microadenomas are <1 cm in diameter. The incidence
of corticotroph adenomas associated with PDH varies widely, probably because detection of small tumors
requires careful microdissection, experience, and special
stains. In one study using immunocytochemical staining, more than 80% of dogs with PDH were positive for
pituitary adenomas. Macroadenomas are >1 cm in diameter and only a small percentage of dogs have large corticotroph adenomas (Figure 11.54). These may compress
the remaining pituitary and extend dorsally into the
hypothalamus. However, they are generally slow growing
and do not always produce neurologic signs. Malignant
pituitary tumors are rare.
The defect responsible for PDH unassociated with pituitary neoplasia is unknown. A primary failure of the negative feedback response by cortisol has been proposed.
Others suspect an overproduction of CRH from the hypothalamus, which may cause diffuse hyperplasia of ACTHproducing cells in the anterior pituitary. From a clinical
point of view the precise pituitary pathology is not of
great importance unless neurologic signs are present at
the time of diagnosis or become apparent during the initial treatment.

Adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
The remaining 15–20% of spontaneous cases of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs and cats are caused by unilateral
or, occasionally, bilateral adrenal tumors, which can be
benign or malignant. Adrenocortical adenomas are small

K22463_C011.indd 420

Figure 11.54 A large corticotroph adenoma associated with
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. The dog was
successfully treated for 5 years while the tumor was gradually
enlarging.

(usually <4 cm in diameter), well-circumscribed tumors
that do not metastasize and are not locally invasive.
Approximately 50% are partially calcified. Adrenocortical
carcinomas are usually larger, locally invasive, hemorrhagic, and necrotic. Tumor calcification also occurs
in about 50% of dogs. The tumors frequently invade
the phrenicoabdominal vein and caudal vena cava and
metastasize to the liver, lung, and kidney.
In dogs, adrenocortical adenomas and carcinomas
occur in approximately equal proportions. The cortex
contiguous to the tumor and that of the contralateral
gland will tend to become atrophied in the presence of
functional adenomas and carcinomas (Figure 11.55). This
is important if the tumor is removed surgically, as postoperatively the animal may not be able to secrete sufficient
glucocorticoids. Function of the zona glomerulosa should
not be affected.

Clinical presentation
Any breed of dog can develop hyperadrenocorticism, but
Poodles, Dachshunds, Spaniels, and small terriers (e.g.
Yorkshire Terrier, Jack Russell Terrier, and Staffordshire
Bull Terrier) appear more at risk of developing PDH.
Adrenocortical tumors occur more frequently in larger
breeds of dog. No breed predisposition has been recorded
in cats.
PDH is usually a disease of the middle aged to older
dog, with an age range of 2–16 years and a median age of
7–9 years. Dogs with adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism tend to be older, with a range of 6–16 years and a
median age of 10–11 years. There is no significant difference in sex distribution in PDH; however, female dogs are

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

three times more likely to develop adrenal tumors than
males. Affected dogs usually develop a classic combination of clinical signs associated with increased glucocorticoid levels. These are listed in Table 11.16 in approximate
decreasing order of frequency. Some dogs, however, and
particularly those of the larger breeds, may not show all
the classic signs.
Hyperadrenocorticism has an insidious onset and
is slowly progressive over many months or even years.
Many owners consider the early signs as part of the normal aging process of their dog. In a few cases, clinical
signs may be intermittent, with periods of remission and
relapse, and in other cases there may be rapid onset and
progression of clinical signs.
Polydipsia, defined as water intake in excess of
100 ml/kg body weight/day, and polyuria, defined as
urine production in excess of 50 ml/kg body weight/day,
are seen in virtually all cases of hyperadrenocorticism.

11.55

Figure 11.55 A large adrenal tumor invading the kidney from a
dog with adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
Table 11.16 Clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism (in
approximate decreasing order of frequency).
Polydipsia and polyuria
Polyphagia
Abdominal distension
Liver enlargement
Muscle wasting/weakness
Lethargy, poor exercise tolerance
Skin changes
Alopecia
Hypertension
Persistent anestrus or testicular atrophy
Calcinosis cutis
Myotonia
Neurologic signs

K22463_C011.indd 421

421

Excessive thirst, nocturia, and/or urination in the house
are usually noted by owners. The polydipsia occurs secondary to the polyuria, which is only partially responsive
to water deprivation.
Increased appetite is common, but most owners often
assess this as a sign of good health. However, a voracious
appetite and scavenging or stealing food may give rise
to concern, especially if the dog previously had a poor
appetite. Polyphagia is assumed to be a direct effect of
glucocorticoids.
A pot-bellied appearance is very common in hyperadrenocorticism, but it may be so gradual that owners fail
to recognize its significance (Figure 11.56). The abdominal distension is associated with redistribution of fat to
the abdomen, liver enlargement, and abdominal muscle
wasting and weakness.
The gradual onset of lethargy and poor exercise tolerance are usually considered by most owners to be compatible with aging. Only when muscle weakness is severe,
as reflected by an inability to climb stairs or jump into the
car, does the owner become concerned. Lethargy, excessive panting, and poor exercise tolerance are probably an
expression of muscle wasting and weakness. Apart from
the development of a pendulous abdomen, decreased
muscle mass may be noted around the limbs, over the
spine, or over the temporal region. Muscle weakness is the
result of muscle wasting caused by protein catabolism.
Occasionally, dogs with hyperadrenocorticism develop
myotonia, characterized by persistent active muscle contractions that continue after voluntary or involuntary
stimuli (Figure 11.57). All limbs may be affected, but the
signs are usually more severe in the hindlimbs. Animals
with myotonia walk with a stiff stilted gait. The affected
limbs are rigid and rapidly return to extension after
11.56

Figure 11.56 A 10-year-old Yorkshire Terrier with
hyperadrenocorticism showing a pot-bellied appearance and
bilaterally symmetrical alopecia.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

422

Diseases of specific organ systems

being passively flexed. Spinal reflexes are difficult to elicit
because of the rigidity, but pain sensation is normal. The
muscles are usually slightly hypertrophied rather than
being atrophied, and a myotonic dimple can be elicited by
percussion of the affected muscle. Bizarre high-frequency
discharges are noted on electromyography.
The skin, particularly over the ventral abdomen,
becomes thin and inelastic (Figure 11.58). Elasticity can
be assessed clinically by tenting the skin between the
thumb and forefinger. In the normal dog the skin will
flow back to a smooth contour, but in hyperadrenocorticism it remains tented. Striae can form as a result of
this inelasticity. The abdominal veins are prominent
and easily visible through the thin skin. There is often
excessive surface scale and comedones, caused by follicular plugging, are seen, especially around the nipples
(Figure 11.59). Hyperpigmentation of the skin is rare in
canine hyperadrenocorticism.

Protein catabolism, causing atrophic collagen, also
leads to excessive bruising following either venepuncture
or other minor trauma. Wound healing is extraordinarily
slow, presumably because of inhibition of fibroblast proliferation and collagen synthesis. Healing wounds often
undergo dehiscence and even old scars may start to break
down (Figure 11.60).
Calcinosis cutis is a frequent finding in biopsy material
from the skin; however, clinical evidence of calcinosis cutis
is less common. The gross appearance can vary, but the
predilection sites are the neck, axilla, ventral abdomen,
and inguinal areas (Figure 11.61). Calcinosis cutis usually
appears as a firm, slightly elevated, white or cream plaque
surrounded by a ring of erythema. Large plaques tend to
crack, become secondarily infected, and develop a crust
containing white powdery material. The exact pathogenesis is unknown, but plasma calcium and phosphorus
concentrations are usually normal. Mineralization of the

11.57

11.59

Figure 11.57 An 11-year-old Poodle with hyperadrenocorticism
showing rigidity associated with myotonia.

Figure 11.59 A close up of comedones around the nipple of a
Poodle with hyperadrenocorticism.

11.58

Figure 11.58 Thin, inelastic skin on the ventral abdomen of a
Dachshund with hyperadrenocorticism.

K22463_C011.indd 422

11.60

Figure 11.60 Stretching of an abdominal scar and striae on the
ventral abdomen of a Boxer with hyperadrenocorticism.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

soft tissues may be seen at other sites (e.g. the bronchial
walls and kidneys) on radiographic examination.
Thinning of the hair coat, leading to bilaterally symmetrical alopecia, is frequently seen with hyperadrenocorticism and occurs because of the inhibitory effect of
cortisol on the anagen or growth phase of the hair cycle.
The remaining hair is dull and dry because it is in the
telogen or resting phase of the hair cycle. The alopecia is
nonpruritic and affects mainly the flanks, ventral abdomen and chest, perineum, and neck. The head, feet, and
tail are usually the last areas to be affected (Figure 11.62).
The coat color is often lighter than normal.
Systemic hypertension and associated proteinuria
may be found in cases of hyperadrenocorticism. In the
majority of cases, the degree of hypertension is moderate
and not associated with clinical signs; however, hypertension-induced blindness due to intraocular hemorrhage
and retinal detachment has occasionally been reported.
Entire bitches with hyperadrenocorticism usually
cease to cycle. The length of anestrus (often years) indicates the duration of the disease process. In the intact
male both testes become soft and flabby. Anestrus and testicular atrophy occur due to the negative feedback effect
of high concentrations of cortisol on the pituitary, which
also suppresses secretion of gonadotropic hormones.
Although uncommon at the time of presentation,
a few cases develop neurologic signs associated with
large expanding functional pituitary tumors. The most
common clinical signs are dullness, depression, loss of
learned behavior, anorexia, aimless wandering, head
pressing, circling, ataxia, blindness, anisocoria, and seizures. More often, however, neurologic signs develop
during initial treatment of PDH with mitotane or trilostane. This is thought to involve removal of the negative

11.61

Figure 11.61 Calcinosis cutis (arrow) and comedones on the
ventral abdomen of a Poodle with hyperadrenocorticism.

K22463_C011.indd 423

423

feedback of cortisol, which can cause some pituitary
tumors to enlarge rapidly.

Differential diagnosis
Causes of polydipsia/polyuria (Table 11.4), liver disease,
hypothyroidism, Sertoli cell tumor, ovarian imbalance.

Diagnosis
Laboratory findings
The main hematologic, biochemical, and urinalysis findings are listed in Table 11.17. The most consistent hematologic finding is a stress leukogram with a relative and
absolute lymphopenia (<1.5 × 109/l [<1.5 × 103/µl]) and
eosinopenia (<0.2 × 109/l [<0.2 × 103/µl]). Lymphopenia
is most likely the result of steroid lymphocytolysis and/
or redistribution of T cells to lymphoid tissues, and the
eosinopenia results from bone marrow sequestration of
eosinophils. A mild to moderate neutrophilia and monocytosis may be present, and it is thought that excessive
glucocorticoids result in decreased capillary margination
and diapedesis and increased release from the bone marrow. The red cell count is usually normal, although mild
polycythemia may occasionally be noted. Platelet counts
may also be elevated. These findings are thought to result
from stimulatory effects of glucocorticoids on the bone
marrow.
Glucocorticoids, both endogenous and exogenous,
induce a specific hepatic isoenzyme of ALP in the dog.
The increase in serum ALP is commonly 5–40 times the
normal level and is perhaps one of the most reliable indicators of hyperadrenocorticism. Measurement of the specific steroid-induced isoenzyme of ALP has been used for
more accurate assessment of elevated serum ALP activity. A marked increase in serum ALP is rarely seen in cats

11.62

Figure 11.62 Bilaterally symmetrical alopecia in a Wirehaired
Dachshund with hyperadrenocorticism.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

424

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 11.17 Laboratory findings in hyperadrenocorticism.
Hematology
Lymphopenia (<1.5 × 109/l [<1.5 × 103/µl])
Eosinopenia (<0.2 × 109/l [<0.2 × 103/µl])
Neutrophilia
Monocytosis
Erythrocytosis
Biochemistry
Increased ALP (often markedly elevated); dog only
Increased ALT
High normal fasting blood glucose; rarely diabetic except for
the cat
Decreased blood urea
Increased cholesterol (>8 mmol/l [>309 mg/dl])
Lipemia
Increased bile acid
Urinalysis
Urine SG <1.015
Glycosuria (<10% of canine cases)
Urinary tract infection
Other findings
Low T4 concentrations
Subnormal T4 response to TSH or TRH stimulation

with hyperadrenocorticism because they do not possess a
steroid-induced isoenzyme and have the ability to clear
serum of excess ALP. ALT is commonly elevated in hyperadrenocorticism, but the increase is usually only mild and
is believed to result from liver damage caused by swollen
hepatocytes due to glycogen storage. Blood glucose is usually in the high normal range, but about 10% of canine
cases will develop overt diabetes mellitus. The gluconeogenic effect of glucocorticoids results in insulin antagonism and subsequent development of pancreatic islet cell
exhaustion. Cats appear to be more prone to developing
hyperglycemia and overt diabetes. In contrast to the dog,
where polydipsia and polyuria are amongst the earliest
clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism, the onset of polydipsia and polyuria is delayed in the cat and coincides
with the development of moderate to severe hyperglycemia and glycosuria. Hyperadrenocorticism should be suspected in any cat that requires high daily insulin doses to
control the hyperglycemia and glycosuria.
Blood urea is usually below normal due to the continual urinary loss associated with glucocorticoid-induced
diuresis. Serum creatinine concentrations also tend to be
in the low to normal range. Cholesterol and lipid concentrations are usually increased due to glucocorticoid stimulation of lipolysis. Cholesterol is usually >8 mmol/l (>309
mg/dl) but this is not a specific finding as cholesterol is

K22463_C011.indd 424

also raised in hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, chronic
liver disease, and chronic renal disease, all of which
may be differential diagnoses. Lipemia is important as
it can interfere with the accurate assessment of a number of laboratory parameters. Resting and postprandial
bile acid concentrations may show a mild to moderate
increase in some cases of hyperadrencorticism due to steroid hepatopathy.
The SG of the urine is usually <1.015 and is often hyposthenuric (<1.010) provided water has not been withheld.
Dogs with hyperadrenocorticism can concentrate their
urine if deprived of water, but their concentrating ability
is usually reduced. Urinary tract infection is common and
occurs in about half the cases of hyperadrenocorticism;
however, it does not result in typical signs of cystitis due
to the anti-inflammatory effects of excess glucocorticoids.
Proteinuria, defined as a urine protein:creatinine ratio
of equal to or greater than 1.0, is present in over 40% of
untreated cases of hyperadrenocorticism. Glycosuria is
present in the 10% of cases with diabetes mellitus.
Basal thyroxine concentrations are decreased in about
70% of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. This is, in part,
due to inhibition of TRH and reduced pituitary secretion
of TSH. Excess cortisol, however, may also alter thyroid
hormone binding to plasma proteins and enhance the
metabolism of thyroid hormone. The response to stimulation by TSH usually parallels that of normal dogs, but thyroxine concentrations both before and after stimulation
with TSH are subnormal. Endogenous canine TSH concentrations are usually low, but may be increased in some
cases, mimicking the changes seen in hypothyroidism.

Diagnostic imaging
Radiography
Radiographic examination of the thorax and abdomen
is advisable in all cases of suspected or proven hyperadrenocorticism. Although positive diagnostic information
is only obtained in the small number of cases in which
adrenal enlargement can be detected, the number and
frequency of radiologic changes consistent with hyperadrenocorticism provide a useful aid to diagnosis. In
addition, survey radiographs may reveal significant concurrent disease. The most common radiologic signs of
hyperadrenocorticism are listed in Table 11.18.
Hepatomegaly is the most consistent radiographic
finding in hyperadrenocorticism. Good radiographic contrast permits easy identification of the abdominal structures because of the large deposits of intra-abdominal
fat. Hepatomegaly may be mild to severe and the ventral
lobe borders vary in shape between distinctly rounded

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

425

Table 11.18 Radiologic signs of hyperadrenocorticism.
Abdominal radiographs
Liver enlargement
Good radiographic contrast
Pot-bellied appearance
Calcinosis cutis/soft tissue mineralization
Distended bladder
Cystic or renal calculi
Adrenal enlargement/calcification
Osteopenia
Thoracic radiographs
Tracheal and bronchial wall calcification
Pulmonary metastasis from adrenocortical carcinoma
Osteopenia
Pulmonary interstitial mineralization (rare)
Congestive heart failure (rare)
Pulmonary thromboembolism (rare)

and sharply wedge shaped. The pot-bellied appearance is
usually very obvious on the recumbent lateral projection
(Figure 11.63). Hepatomegaly and a pendulous abdomen
are the most consistent radiographic findings in cats with
hyperadrenocorticism.
Adrenal enlargement is the least common finding on
abdominal radiographs. Gross enlargement is suggestive,
although not diagnostic, of an adrenocortical carcinoma.
Unilateral mineralization in the region of an adrenal gland suggests the possibility of an adrenal tumor
(Figure 11.64). Both adrenocortical adenomas and carcinomas can become calcified. Radiography of the abdomen not infrequently demonstrates calcification of the
adrenal glands in normal older cats and is not associated
with any functional abnormality.
Calcinosis cutis tends to have a nodular mineralization
pattern, whereas calcification in the fascial planes (e.g.
just dorsal to the thoracolumbar spine) tends to be linear.
Mineralization may also be seen in the renal pelvis, liver,
gastric mucosa, and abdominal aorta.
A grossly distended urinary bladder may be seen
radiographically even when the animal has been allowed
to urinate prior to the radiographic examination. Cystic
calculi may also be present and are usually associated
with urinary tract infection. Occasionally, the impression
of osteopenia is gained from a distinct reduction in radiographic density of the lumbar vertebral bodies relative
to the vertebral end plates. Tracheal and bronchial wall
calcification is frequently seen radiographically in cases
of hyperadrenocorticism. However, calcification of these
structures can be seen in animals as part of the normal
aging process and is not considered to be a highly significant finding.

K22463_C011.indd 425

11.63

Figure 11.63 Lateral abdominal radiograph of a case of
hyperadrenocorticism. Cystic calculi are also present.

11.64

Figure 11.64 Lateral abdominal radiograph of a 9-year-old
German Shepherd Dog with a right adrenal tumor (arrow).

The thoracic radiographs should also be examined for
evidence of pulmonary metastases from an adrenocortical
carcinoma, CHF, osteoporosis of the thoracic spine, or pulmonary thromboembolism. The latter is a rare complication of hyperadrenocorticism and may be suspected when
the radiographic signs include pleural effusion, increased
diameter and blunting of pulmonary arteries, decreased
vascularity of the affected lobes, and overperfusion of the
unobstructed pulmonary vasculature. However, in some
cases of pulmonary t­hromboembolism the radiographs
may reveal no abnormalities.

Ultrasonography
Abdominal ultrasonography is frequently used to examine the adrenal glands. It is a challenge for the ultrasonographer to distinguish consistently between normal and

25/04/16 11:03 pm

426

Diseases of specific organ systems

hyperplastic adrenal glands, since the diagnosis of adrenal hyperplasia is somewhat subjective. Measurement of
the thickness (ventrodorsal dimension) of the adrenal
gland has been shown to be more sensitive than either
the length or width of the gland. A thickness of >7.5 mm
for the left adrenal gland would be suggestive of adrenal hyperplasia (Figures 11.65, 11.66). If both adrenal
glands are of similar size and normal shape in a dog or
cat with hyperadrenocorticism, it confirms the disease
is PDH.
Abdominal ultrasonography can also detect adrenocortical tumors (Figure 11.67). Adrenal masses are
diagnosed by the location of the mass and the clinical
signs exhibited by the animal. There is a propensity for
­adrenal tumors to invade nearby vessels and surrounding tissues, therefore a thorough ultrasonographic
­examination of adjacent vessels and tissues should be

performed (Figures 11.68, 11.69a, b). Mineralization
is frequently associated with benign and malignant
adrenocortical tumors in the dog, and acoustic shadowing may aid in localizing the adrenal tumor. If an
adrenal mass is identified, the liver should also be
examined ultrasonographically for evidence of hepatic
metastases.

CT and MR imaging
CT and MR imaging have proved helpful in the diagnosis
of adrenal tumors, adrenal hyperplasia, and large pituitary tumors (Figure 11.70), but these techniques are
more expensive.

11.67

11.65

Figure 11.67 Ultrasonogram of a large adrenal tumor adjacent
to the left kidney in a Rottweiler with adrenal-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism.

Figure 11.65 Ultrasonogram of a Boxer with adrenal
hyperplasia due to PDH.

11.68

11.66

CVC

Figure 11.66 Ultrasonogram showing right-sided adrenal
enlargement with nodular hyperplasia. The dog was being
treated with trilostane, which can cause treatment-associated
adrenomegaly.

K22463_C011.indd 426

INTRALUMINAL MASS

Figure 11.68 Ultrasonogram of an adrenal tumor (arrow)
invading the caudal vena cava in a Labrador Retriever with
adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

427

11.69

11.70

a

Figure 11.70 A contrast CT scan of a cushingoid dog showing
a large pituitary macroadenoma (arrowheads) expanding deep
into the diencephalon. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

b
Figure 11.69a, b A plain abdominal ultrasound examination
(a) and a flow Doppler evaluation (b) showing invasion of the
caudal vena cava by a malignant adrenocortical carcinoma.

Endocrine screening tests
A presumptive diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism can be
made from clinical signs, physical examination, routine
laboratory tests, and diagnostic imaging findings, but the
diagnosis must be confirmed by either an ACTH stimulation test or a low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
(LDDST) (see Table 11.19).

ACTH stimulation test
The ACTH stimulation test (see Figure 11.52) is the best
screening test for distinguishing spontaneous from
iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism. It reliably identifies
about 85% of dogs with PDH, but only about 50% of
those dogs with adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. It is a simple test to perform and the only one that
directly documents excessive production of glucocorticoids by the adrenal cortex. The information gained
also provides a baseline for monitoring trilostane or
mitotane therapy. However, the ACTH stimulation test
does not reliably differentiate adrenal-dependent

K22463_C011.indd 427

hyperadrenocorticism from PDH. A diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism should not be excluded on the basis of
a normal ACTH response if the clinical signs are compatible with the disease. Occasionally, an animal under
chronic stress may develop some degree of adrenal
hyperplasia, which produces an abnormal or equivocal ACTH response result. The author has seen this in a
number of severe systemic diseases (e.g. uncontrolled
diabetes mellitus and pyometra) and has documented a
normal ACTH response after treatment in each case. The
ACTH response test is not as reliable for diagnosing this
disorder in the cat.

Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
The LDDST (Figure 11.71) is more reliable than the
ACTH stimulation test in confirming hyperadrenocorticism, since the results are diagnostic in most adrenal-­
dependent cases and in 90% of dogs with PDH. However,
it is not as useful as the ACTH stimulation test for the
detection of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism. It is also
affected by more variables, takes 8 hours to complete,
and does not provide pretreatment information that may
aid in monitoring the effects of trilostane or mitotane
therapy. The LDDST, like the ACTH stimulation test, does
not reliably differentiate PDH from adrenal-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism.
Interpretation of the results of a LDDST must be based
on the laboratory’s normal range of cortisol values for the
dose and preparation of dexamethasone administered. If
the dose of dexamethasone fails to suppress adequately

25/04/16 11:03 pm

428

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 11.19 Protocols for endocrine screening tests for hyperadrenocorticism.
ACTH stimulation test
Protocol:
•• Collect 3 ml plasma or serum sample for basal cortisol concentration*
•• Inject 0.25 mg of synthetic ACTH** (tetracosactrin; Synacthen, Alliance) IV in dogs >5 kg. Use only 0.125 mg in dogs <5 kg
•• Collect a second sample for cortisol concentration 30–60 minutes later
*The recent administration of glucocorticoids, such as hydrocortisone, prednisolone, or prednisone, may result in elevated cortisol concentrations due to cross-reactivity in many cortisol assays. For this reason glucocorticoids should be withheld for at least
24 hours before testing. There is no cross-reactivity with dexamethasone, but dexamethasone will suppress cortisol concentrations in patients with an intact hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis
**Sold in USA as cosyntropin (Cortrosyn, Organon)
Interpretation:
•• In normal dogs, pre-ACTH cortisol concentrations are usually between 20 and 250 nmol/l (0.7 and 9.1 µg/dl), with post-ACTH
cortisol concentrations between 200 and 450 nmol/l (7.2 and 16.3 µg/dl)
•• An exaggerated response (post-ACTH cortisol concentrations >600 nmol/l [>21.7 µg/dl]) is expected in dogs and cats with
hyperadrenocorticism. The ACTH stimulation test reliably identifies more than 50% of dogs with adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism and about 85% of dogs with PDH. Exaggerated responses to ACTH may also be seen in chronic illness (e.g.
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus)
•• The ACTH stimulation test is the best screening test for distinguishing spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism from iatrogenic
Cushing’s disease where reduced responses to ACTH are recorded due to adrenocortical suppression as a result of long-term or
high-dose glucocorticoid administration
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test (LDDST)
Protocol:
•• Collect 3 ml plasma or serum sample for cortisol determination
•• Inject 0.01 mg/kg of dexamethasone IV
•• Collect a second sample for cortisol concentration 4 hours later and a third sample 8 hours after dexamethasone
administration
Interpretation:
•• A plasma or serum cortisol concentration exceeding 40 nmol/l (1.5 µg/dl) at 8 hours is regarded as diagnostic for hyperadrenocorticism. The LDDST reliably identifies all dogs with adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism and about 90% of
PDH. However, stress during therapy may cause animals without hyperadrenocorticism to break the suppressive effect of
dexamethasone
•• Cortisol concentrations at 0 and 4 hours are not required for the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism, but may be informative
in the differential diagnosis. Suppression of the cortisol concentration to <30 nmol/l (<1.1 µg/dl) at 4 hours with a rebound
escape of suppression at 8 hours would be suggestive of PDH. Cases of adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism do not show
significant suppression of cortisol at 4 hours; however, up to 40% of dogs with PDH will not show suppression at 4 hours either
Urine cortisol:creatinine ratio
Protocol:
•• Urine (5 ml) is collected in the morning for cortisol and creatinine measurements. It is preferable for the dog to be at home for
this test so that it is as little stressed as possible. The urine cortisol:creatinine ratio is determined by dividing the urine cortisol
concentration (in nmol/l) by the urine creatinine concentration (in µmol/l)
Interpretation:
•• The reference ratio for normal dogs is less than 10 × 106. The urine cortisol:creatinine ratio is increased above the normal
(>10 × 106) in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. However, the ratio is also increased in many dogs with nonadrenal illness.
Therefore, while this simple test appears highly sensitive in detecting hyperadrenocorticism in dogs, it is not specific. The
test does provide a good screening test for hyperadrenocorticism and values in the normal range make a diagnosis of
hyperadrenocorticism highly unlikely

circulating cortisol concentrations in a dog with compatible clinical signs, a diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism is
confirmed. While basal and 8-hour post-dexamethasone
samples are most important for interpretation of the

K22463_C011.indd 428

test, one or more samples taken at intermediate times
(for example, 2, 4, or 6 hours) during the test period may
also prove helpful. If a plasma cortisol concentration
determined 2–6 hours after dexamethasone injection is

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

Cortisol nmol/l (μg/dl)

11.71

300 (10.9)

429

Table 11.20 Protocols for endocrine tests to differentiate the
cause of hyperadrenocorticism.
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test
•• Collect 3 ml serum or plasma sample for cortisol
determination
•• Inject 0.1 mg/kg (although some authors recommend
1.0 mg/kg) of dexamethasone IV
•• Collect two post-dexamethasone samples, one at 4 hours
and a second at 8 hours after the dexamethasone

250 (9.0)
200 (7.2)
150 (5.4)
100 (3.6)
50 (1.8)
0
0

2

4

Hyperadrenocorticism–
possible ADH response

6

8
Hours

Normal
Hyperadrenocorticism–
possible PDH response

Plasma endogenous ACTH concentration
•• Blood (5 ml) is collected into a cooled plastic EDTA tube
and centrifuged at 4°C immediately
•• The plasma should then be harvested and stored frozen
(at <– 20°C) in a plastic tube
•• Samples must be transported to the laboratory frozen
and kept frozen until assayed
•• Stringent and meticulous sample handling is crucial since
hormone activity in the plasma will reduce rapidly, resulting in falsely low values and incorrect interpretation
•• The endogenous ACTH assay must be validated for use
in dogs, otherwise the test may provide spurious results
that could be misleading

Figure 11.71 Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test.

Plasma ACTH concentration
suppressed to <40 nmol/l (<1.5 µg/dl), while the 8-hour
sample shows escape from cortisol suppression, then a
diagnosis of PDH can be made. While some cases of PDH
will not suppress at any stage during a LDDST, any suppression during the 8-hour period essentially rules out a
diagnosis of adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
This test is variable and thus not always reliable for diagnosing hyperadrenocorticism in the cat.

Other screening tests
Evaluation of urinary corticoid:creatinine ratio rather
than the more laborious 24-hour urinary corticoid excretion has been shown to be a simple and valuable screening
test that is highly sensitive in detecting hyperadrenocorticism; however, it lacks specificity and is affected by
many variables. The test does provide useful information
in that values within the reference range make a diagnosis of hyperadrenorcorticism highly unlikely.

Endocrine tests to differentiate the cause of
hyperadrenocorticism
The ability to differentiate between PDH and adrenal-­
dependent hyperadrenocorticism is important in order to
provide a better prognosis and the most effective method
of management for the disease. An accurate test is therefore required to differentiate pituitary from adrenal
causes of hyperadrenocorticism. The protocols for such
tests are listed in Table 11.20.

K22463_C011.indd 429

The determination of plasma ACTH concentrations in the
dog provides a reliable test for differentiating pituitary
and adrenal causes of hyperadrenocorticism providing
sample handling is meticulous. Dogs with adrenal tumors
have undetectably low endogenous ACTH concentrations,
whereas cases of PDH have normal or high concentrations.

High-dose dexamethasone suppression test
The high-dose dexamethasone suppression test was the
most commonly used test for differentiating the cause
of hyperadrenocorticism, but it is less accurate than
abdominal ultrasonography or plasma ACTH measurements. This test may be indicated in cases where the
diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism has been established
by a screening test, but the differentiation between adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism and PDH has not
been determined. The high dose of dexamethasone inhibits pituitary ACTH secretion through negative feedback
in PDH, thus suppressing serum cortisol concentrations
by 50% or more by 4 hours. Adrenocortical tumors are
autonomous, therefore serum cortisol is not suppressed
at 4 hours if an adrenocortical tumor is present. However,
approximately 20–30% of PDH cases will not suppress
with this test, and the test does not differentiate adrenocortical adenomas from adrenocortical carcinomas. This
test has been ­recommended for diagnosing hyperadrenocorticism in the cat, but the high dose of dexamethasone
can cause or worsen concurrent diabetes mellitus.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

430

Diseases of specific organ systems

Management
Treatment of pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism
Trilostane therapy
Trilostane is a short-acting, synthetic steroid analog that
competitively inhibits 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, thus interfering with adrenal steroid biosynthesis.
It has been successfully used to treat hyperadrenocorticism in dogs with relatively few adverse effects.
Treatment is initiated at 2–6 mg/kg once daily with
food and the dosage adjusted on the results of the ACTH
stimulation test carried out 4 hours after the administration of trilostane. Following the introduction of trilostane therapy, patients should be re-examined and an
ACTH stimulation performed at 7–14 days and then at
30 and 90 days, or more frequently if problems occur. If
the post-ACTH cortisol concentration is <20 nmol/l (<0.7
µg/dl), trilostane should be stopped for 5–7 days and
then re-started at a lower dose. If the post-ACTH cortisol
concentration is >120 nmol/l (>4.3 µg/dl), the dose of trilostane should be increased. If the post-ACTH cortisol concentration is between 20 and 120 nmol/l (0.7 and 4.3 µg/dl)
and the patient appears clinically well controlled, the
dose should remain unchanged. If, however, the patient’s
clinical signs appear poorly or only partially controlled,
trilostane may need to be given twice daily.
Minor adverse effects such as mild lethargy, diarrhea, or decreased appetite may occur soon after starting therapy and are usually transient and respond to a
reduction in dose. If more serious adverse effects such
as vomiting, severe or hemorrhagic diarrhea, or severe
depression develop, trilostane should be stopped and
prednisolone replacement therapy instigated. Acute
adrenal necrosis has been associated with death in a few
cases. Hypoadrenocorticism has also been associated with
trilostane therapy. The median survival time for dogs
with PDH treated with trilostane is 22 months. Trilostane
is effective for treating cats with PDH. The starting dose
for cats is 1.0 mg/kg per day and this is subsequently
titrated to effect.

Mitotane therapy
Mitotane (o’p’DDD; Lysodren, Bristol Laboratories) was
formerly the treatment of choice for PDH, but many clinicians have since switched to trilostane as their preferred
treatment. During its evaluation as an insecticide, mitotane was discovered to have adrenocorticolytic effects. It
selectively destroys the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis while tending to preserve the zona glomerulosa.

K22463_C011.indd 430

Mitotane therapy should only be considered once the
diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism has been confirmed.
Because of its powerful effects, it should never be used
empirically. Before treatment is instigated, the patient’s
daily water consumption should be measured over at
least two consecutive 24-hour periods. If the water intake
and appetite are not increased, baseline lymphocyte
and eosinophil counts and an ACTH stimulation test are
required to monitor the response to therapy.
The author prefers to hospitalize the patient for the initial course of treatment, although many clinicians have
dogs treated by their owners at home, with the owners
doing the necessary monitoring. Mitotane is given orally
with food at a dose rate of 50 mg/kg/day. Concomitant
glucocorticoid treatment is not advised, although if the
dog is being treated at home, the owner should be given
a small supply of prednisolone tablets. Daily mitotane
therapy should be continued until any of the following
changes are noted:

●● The water intake of a polydipsic dog drops to below
60 ml/kg/day.

●● The dog takes longer to consume its meal than before
treatment or stops eating completely.

●● The dog vomits or has diarrhea.
●● The dog becomes listless and depressed.
The initial course of mitotane is then stopped and the dog
put on maintenance therapy (see below). The importance
of close monitoring of the patient during this period cannot be overemphasized.
Mitotane therapy is comparatively safe and the side-­
effects that commonly occur (e.g. anorexia, vomiting, or
diarrhea) are rarely serious providing they are noticed
early so that the mitotane can be withheld. Some of the
problems occasionally encountered during treatment
are summarized in Table 11.21, together with their suggested management. Mitotane is ineffective in dogs being
treated with phenobarbital because the latter drug will
enhance mitotane hepatic metabolism.
The majority of dogs with PDH require between 7 and
14 days of treatment, with an average of 10 days, before
water consumption drops to below 60 ml/kg/day. If the
dog is not polydipsic or polyphagic, treatment should continue until the lymphocyte count is above 1.0 × 109 cells/l
or the eosinophil count is above 0.3 ×109 cells/l. However,
the best method of evaluating treatment is by use of the
ACTH stimulation test. In adequately treated cases the
basal and ACTH stimulated serum cortisol concentrations

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

431

Table 11.21 Possible problems arising from mitotane therapy and their management.
Problem

Management

Vomiting or anorexia within the first 3 days of treatment
(gastric irritation)

Discontinue mitotane and reassess patient. Divide dose and give
2–4 times per day

Profound weakness, depression, and anorexia usually around
4th or 5th day of treatment

Discontinue mitotane and reassess patient. Check sodium and
potassium levels and institute prednisolone (0.2 mg/kg/day).
Reassess ACTH stimulation test. Start maintenance therapy with
mitotane

Acute onset of neurologic signs (due to sudden expansion of
the pituitary tumor)

Reassess patient. Continue mitotane unless the dog is anorexic,
vomiting, or depressed. Give prednisolone (2.0 mg/kg/day) or
dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg/day) and decrease dose slowly once
neurologic signs have resolved

Failure to resume normal water intake

Recheck urinalysis and blood urea. Reassess ACTH stimulation
test. Increase mitotane by 50% if post-ACTH cortisol level is
>200 nmol/l (>7.2 µg/dl)

Failure to regrow hair

Reassess ACTH stimulation test. Determine baseline T4. Increase
mitotane by 50% if post-ACTH cortisol level is >200 nmol/l
(>7.2 µg/dl). (If <120 nmol/l [<4.3 µg/dl], perform a TRH/TSH
stimulation test)

Excessive depression or weakness related to weekly maintenance therapy

Reassess patient. Check sodium and potassium levels. Repeat
ACTH stimulation test. If cortisol level post-ACTH is <15 nmol/l
(<0.5 µg/dl), reduce maintenance dose or give every other week

should be <120 nmol/l (<4.3 µg/dl). If the serum cortisol
concentrations exceed 200 nmol/l (7.2 µg/dl) with ACTH
stimulation, further mitotane should be administered
until the cortisol concentrations are adequately suppressed. A few dogs respond in 2–3 days and occasionally
others require more than 60 consecutive days of treatment. It is important to emphasize that each dog must be
treated as an individual if treatment is to be successful.
Having produced sufficient adrenocortical damage
with daily mitotane treatment, it is important to continue therapy, albeit at a lower dose, otherwise the zona
glomerulosa will regenerate a hyperplastic zona fasciculata and zona reticularis and the clinical signs will recur.
Mitotane is given at a dose of 50 mg/kg/week with food.
Cases that are well controlled may sleep for a few hours
after the weekly dose and for that reason it is often recommended that the treatment is given in the evening. More
profound depression or weakness requires re-evaluation
and possibly a reduction of the maintenance dose. Failure
to control the polydipsia may require an increased dose
of mitotane (Table 11.21).
Treated dogs should be re-examined 6–8 weeks after
completion of the initial therapy, unless there are any

K22463_C011.indd 431

problems. Marked improvement should be noted at this
time. The most obvious response is a rapid reduction in
water intake, urine output, and appetite, and this is usually
obvious at the end of the initial course of therapy. Muscle
strength and exercise tolerance improve over the first 3–4
weeks. Skin and hair coat changes take longer and the
progress is variable. The skin and alopecia may deteriorate markedly before improving; alternatively, there may
be a gradual and noticeable resolution of the dermatologic
signs. Although improvement should be noted at 8 weeks,
the skin and hair coat may not return to normal for 3–6
months (Figures 11.72, 11.73). A few dogs have dramatic
changes in coat color following successful therapy.
Re-examination every 3–6 months is recommended for
the remainder of the animal’s life. Relapses and episodes
of overdosage do occur and reassessment of adrenal
reserve by ACTH stimulation testing is indicated. Relapses
may require a short course of daily mitotane therapy
or an increase in the maintenance dosage. Overdosage
requires reassessment by an ACTH stimulation test and a
reduction of the maintenance dose. The median survival
time of treated dogs is 30 months with a range of a few
days to over 7 years.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

432

Diseases of specific organ systems

11.72

11.73

Figures 11.72, 11.73 Response to mitotane therapy. An 8-yearold Cocker Spaniel before treatment (11.72) and 4 months after
treatment (11.73).

Mitotane has been shown to be ineffective in the cat
because of its rapid hepatic metabolism.

Other therapeutic options for pituitary-dependent
adrenocorticism
●● L-deprenyl (selegiline hydrochloride) is a monoamine
oxidase inhibitor that inhibits ACTH secretion by
increasing dopaminergic tone to the hypothalamic–
pituitary axis. The use of L-deprenyl for treatment of
hyperadrenocorticism has been evaluated in dogs.
Although the effectiveness of treatment is variable,
one major advantage of L-deprenyl is the lack of any
severe adverse effects, including iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism. Treatment is initiated at a dosage
of 1 mg/kg daily. If an inadequate response is seen
after 2 months, the dosage is increased to 2 mg/kg/
day. If this dosage also proves ineffective, alternative
treatment is required. However, if the treatment with
L-deprenyl is effective, daily treatment should be continued for the remainder of the dog’s life. Response to

K22463_C011.indd 432

treatment is evaluated by the resolution of clinical
signs, since there is minimal measurable endocrinological improvement. More than 50% of dogs fail to
respond adequately to L-deprenyl.
●● Ketoconazole has a reversible inhibitory effect on
­glucocorticoid synthesis while having minimal effects
on mineralocorticoid production. Ketoconazole has
been used effectively to control hyperadrenocorticism in dogs, but it is not effective in cats. However,
ketoconazole is not uniformly efficacious in dogs
and between one-third and one-half of all dogs
treated fail to respond adequately. The initial recommended dosage of ketoconazole is 10 mg/kg q12h for
14 days. Alternatively, treatment is initiated at 5 mg/
kg q12h for the first 7 days to assess drug tolerance,
then increased to 10 mg/kg. The efficacy of the initial 14-day course of treatment is determined by an
ACTH stimulation test. To ensure adequate control of
hyperadrenocorticism, both the pre- and post-ACTH
serum cortisol concentrations must be lowered into
the basal reference range. If the serum cortisol concentrations remain above this range, the dosage is
increased to 15 mg/kg q12h and an ACTH response
test repeated in 14 days.
●● Bilateral adrenalectomy has been employed successfully, but it involves the risk of putting an ill animal with a compromised immune system and poor
wound healing through a difficult surgical procedure.
Bilateral adrenalectomy used to be the recommended
treatment for feline hyperadrenocorticism despite
its accompanying postoperative morbidity. Patients
treated by this approach require lifelong treatment
for hypoadrenocorticism. More recently, trilostane
has been found to be an effective treatment option
for treating PDH in the cat.
●● Hypophysectomy has been successfully performed in
the dog for the treatment of PDH, but the operation is
technically difficult.

Treatment of adrenal-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism
Dogs diagnosed as having adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism carry the best prognosis if the tumor can
be completely removed surgically, although mitotane
(for dogs) or trilostane (for dogs and cats) therapy is also
recommended.

Unilateral adrenalectomy
This procedure requires considerable expertise because
of the complex anatomy. Preoperative staging using
ultrasonography and radiography or CT is essential.
Adrenalectomy is best performed via a ventral midline

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

11.74

433

of mitotane. The median survival time is 11 months, with
a range from a few weeks to more than 5 years.

Trilostane therapy
Trilostane is also effective and relatively safe in dogs and
cats with adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. The
dose of trilostane needs to be tailored to the individual
patient with an adrenal tumor on the basis of the results
of regular ACTH stimulation testing. There is a tendency
for the dose to increase as the tumor continues to grow.
Survival times similar to mitotane therapy (in dogs) for
adrenal tumors have been reported.

PRIMARY HYPERALDOSTERONISM
Figure 11.74 Surgical view of an adrenocortical carcinoma
that had a spontaneous bleed into the retroperitoneal space.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

Definition/overview

laparotomy (Figure 11.74). It should only be performed
by experienced surgeons as perioperative mortality is
high. Postoperative support is important, as the contralateral adrenal cortex will be atrophic and unable to
respond to the stress. Replacement glucocorticoid and
mineralocorticoid therapy may therefore be required
for 7–10 days postoperatively. Even with experienced
surgeons, there is a high morbidity and mortality rate
and perioperative mortality can be as high as 30%. The
median survival time is around 2 years, with some dogs
surviving for longer than 4 years. Heparin has been recommended for some dogs in the perioperative period
because of hypercoagulability.

Etiology

Mitotane therapy
Mitotane is effective and relatively safe in dogs with
adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Dogs with
­
adrenal tumors, however, tend to be more resistant to
mitotane than dogs with PDH. Generally, dogs with
­adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism require higher
daily induction doses (50–75 mg/kg/day) and a longer period of induction (>14 days) than dogs with PDH.
Frequent monitoring of treatment by ACTH stimulation
testing is important to ensure adequate control of the
hyperadrenocorticism. Maintenance doses are also generally higher (75–100 mg/kg/week) and, again, frequent
monitoring of the cortisol response to ACTH stimulation is required to maintain optimal control of the disease. Adverse effects of treatment are similar to those
described for PDH. Those dogs requiring higher dose
rates tend to be more prone to adverse effects. The adrenal tumor and metastatic mass will often reduce in size
due to the cytotoxic effects of mitotane, but in other cases
the tumor will continue to grow despite increasing doses

K22463_C011.indd 433

Primary hyperaldosteronism is characterized by excessive autonomous secretion of aldosterone from one or
both adrenal glands resulting in clinical signs relating
to hypertension and/or hypokalemia. It is a disease of
­middle aged to old aged cats, with a mean age of 12 years.
There is no breed or sex predisposition. The condition is
rare in dogs.

Adrenocortical tumors are the most common cause of
primary hyperaldosteronism in cats. There is an approximately equal incidence of adenomas and carcinomas
with the right and left adrenal glands being affected with
almost equal frequency. Rarely, bilateral tumors have
been reported. More recently, primary hyperaldosteronism has been recognized in association with adrenocortical hyperplasia.

Pathophysiology
Increased autonomous secretion of aldosterone leads to
excessive sodium and water retention, with resultant
hypertension, and excessive potassium secretion leading
to hypokalemia. The elevated plasma aldosterone and
increased circulating blood volume have a negative feedback effect on renin release, resulting in reduced plasma
renin activity.

Clinical presentation
The most common presenting sign is muscular weakness
due to the hypokalemia. This can range from mild weakness and lethargy to severe generalized weakness, ataxia,
depressed spinal reflexes, and flaccidity. Ventroflexion of
the neck may be noted (Figure 11.75). Blindness, which
may be sudden or gradual in onset, is due to systemic
hypertension and usually results from retinal detachment
and intraocular hemorrhage. Systemic hypertension can

25/04/16 11:03 pm

434

Diseases of specific organ systems

11.75

Table 11.22 Differential diagnosis of feline hypokalemia.
Decreased intake
Anorexia
Potassium-deficient intravenous fluids
Potassium-deficient diet
Potassium translocation
Metabolic alkalosis
Insulin administration
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Periodic hypokalemia (Burmese cats)

Figure 11.75 A Burmese cat showing ventroflexion of the neck
due to hypokalemia.

also lead to left ventricular hypertrophy and cardiac murmurs. Impaired renal function is common and many cats
also exhibit polydipsia and polyuria.

Differential diagnosis
The differential diagnoses of hypokalemia and hypertension are given in Tables 11.22 and 11.23, respectively.

Diagnosis
The diagnosis of primary hyperaldosteronism is based on
demonstrating the presence of an adrenal tumor, together
with an elevated plasma aldosterone concentration.
Adrenal tumors can usually be identified using ultrasonography (Figure 11.76). Abdominal ultrasonography
can also be used to identify metastases and evidence of
invasion of surrounding structures, particularly the caudal vena cava. CT and MRI have also been used.
Plasma aldosterone concentrations are usually raised
to between 2 and 30 times the reference range. Although
ACTH stimulation has been described when measuring plasma aldosterone, there is no clear evidence of
improved diagnostic performance following ACTH stimulation. It should be noted, however, that raised aldosterone concentrations are not pathognomonic for primary
hyperaldosteronism and that diseases that activate the
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system (RAAS), especially chronic kidney disease and CHF, will cause secondary hyperaldosteronism.
Adrenal hyperplasia can only be diagnosed by demonstrating a raised plasma aldosterone:plasma renin
activity ratio. In primary hyperaldosteronism, plasma
aldosterone is raised, which exerts a negative feedback effect on renin, resulting in reduced plasma renin
activity, as distinct from secondary hyperaldosteronism where the RAAS has been activated. When renin

K22463_C011.indd 434

Increased gastrointestinal loss
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Increased renal loss
Polyuria
Chronic kidney disease
Acute kidney injury (polyuric phase)
Diuretic administration (loop or thiazide diuretics)
Renal tubular acidosis
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Liver failure
Congestive heart failure
Note: Hypokalemia in some diseases may have more than
one mechanism.

Table 11.23 Differential diagnosis of feline hypertension.
Chronic kidney disease
Hyperthyroidism
Diabetes mellitus
Hyperaldosteronism
Hyperadrenocorticism
Chronic anemia
Liver disease

11.76

Figure 11.76 Ultrasonogram of an adrenal tumor (arrowheads)
in a Domestic Longhair cat with primary hyperaldosteronism.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

435

assays are unavailable, the combination of clinical signs
and elevated serum aldosterone levels in the absence
of any demonstrable adrenal mass is highly suggestive of adrenocortical hyperplasia as the cause of the
hyperaldostonism.

may also be noted. The clinical signs vary depending on
whether an excess of epinephrine or norepinephrine is
predominant. In some cases, there may be no reported
clinical signs and an adrenal mass is found incidentally,
usually during abdominal ultrasonography.

Management

Differential diagnosis

Initial therapy should be aimed at controlling hypokalemia and hypertension. Hypokalemia can be treated
with potassium supplementation and the competitive
aldosterone antagonist spironolactone. Hypertension
­
can usually be controlled with amlodipine and
­beta-blockers. Treatment with these drugs can be continued for life and survival times from 4 months to 2.5 years
have been reported. Medical management is the recommended treatment for cases associated with adrenal
hyperplasia.
Although unilateral adrenalectomy is the treatment
of choice for adrenal tumors, perioperative mortality is
relatively high, with intra- and postoperative hemorrhage the most common cause of death. However, those
patients who survive surgery frequently live for more
than a year.

Causes of episodic weakness (Table 11.24).

PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
Definition/overview
Tumors of the adrenal medulla (pheochromocytomas)
are rare in dogs and have only been reported rarely in
cats. They are usually unilateral, benign, slow growing
tumors that may reach a considerable size. Rarely, they
are malignant and may invade the caudal vena cava or
metastasize to lung, liver, or bone. Pheochromocytomas
may secrete excessive amounts of catecholamines.

Pathophysiology
The physiologic effects of catecholamines secreted by
pheochromocytomas account for many of the diverse
clinical signs. The presence of the tumor mass may also
contribute to the clinical presentation.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of a pheochromocytoma may relate to an
abdominal mass compressing adjacent structures or to
the secretion of catecholamines. Clinical signs related
to tumor size might include a palpable abdominal mass,
ascites, and hindlimb weakness. Secretion of catecholamines may be intermittent or persistent and can cause
hypotension or hypertension, tachycardia, tachyarrhythmias with episodic weakness and trembling, head
pressing, or seizures. Epistaxis and retinal hemorrhages

K22463_C011.indd 435

Table 11.24 Differential diagnosis of episodic weakness.
Cardiovascular disorders
Bradyarrhythmia
Tachyarrhythmia
Congenital heart disease (e.g. aortic or pulmonic stenosis,
tetralogy of Fallot, reverse shunting PDA)
Acquired heart disease (e.g. valvular, myocardial, pericardial)
Heartworm disease (dirofilariasis, angiostrongylosis)
Vasovagal syncope
Vasodilation
(Aortic) thromboembolism
Respiratory disorders
Laryngeal paralysis
Brachycephalic airway disease
Tracheal collapse
Severe coughing
Filaroides osleri
Pulmonary disease
Pleural effusions
Thoracic masses
Hematologic disorders
Anemia
Myeloproliferative disorders
Polycythemia
Hyperviscosity syndrome
Hemoglobinopathies
Pyrexia of unknown origin
Orthopedic disorders
Degenerative joint disease, particularly hips or stifles
Polyarthritis – various types
Neuromuscular disorders
Myasthenia gravis
Polymyositis
Hereditary myopathy of Labrador Retrievers
Sex-linked muscular dystrophy – Irish Terriers, Golden
Retrievers
Myotonia in Chow Chows, Staffordshire Terriers
Malignant hyperthermia
Mitochondrial myopathies
Exertional myopathy (rhabdomyolysis)
(continued)

25/04/16 11:03 pm

436

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 11.24 Differential diagnosis of episodic weakness.
(continued)
Neurologic disorders
Congenital or acquired spinal disorders including wobbler
syndrome
Epilepsy (various causes)
Vestibular disease
Cerebellar disorders
Thiamine deficiency
Congenital disorders (e.g. hydrocephalus)
Acquired disorders (e.g. old dog encephalitis, cerebral vascular accident, tumors)
Lysosomal storage diseases
Giant axonal neuropathy
Progressive axonopathy – Boxer
Tetanus
Botulism
Narcolepsy/cataplexy – Dobermann, Poodle, Labrador
Retriever
Generalized tremor
Jack Russell Terrier ataxia
Scottie cramp – also in the Norwich and Jack Russell Terrier,
Dalmatian
Episodic falling in the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
Metabolic disorders
Hepatic encephalopathy
Uremic encephalopathy
Hyperglycemia
Hypoglycemia
Hyponatremia
Hyperkalemia
Hypokalemia
Hypercalcemia
Hypocalcemia
Hypermagnesemia
Hypomagnesemia
Acidosis
Hyperthermia (heatstroke)
Hypoxia
Shock

11.77

11.78

Figures 11.77, 11.78 (11.77) Contrast venogram radiographic
study showing abnormal dispersion of the contrast
medium in the posterior vena cava. This was caused by a
pheochromocytoma invading the vessel. (11.78) The pathology
at postmortem is shown. (Courtesy M. Schaer)
11.79

Endocrine disorders
Insulinoma
Hyperadrenocorticism – myotonia
Hypoadrenocorticism
Hypoparathyroidism
Hypothyroidism
Pheochromocytoma
Diabetic ketoacidosis

Diagnosis
A diagnosis of pheochromocytoma should be suspected in
any unexplained case of episodic weakness. Radiographic
and ultrasonographic examinations will often reveal
a mass in the adrenal area (Figures 11.77–11.79).
However, confirmation requires quantification of

K22463_C011.indd 436

Figure 11.79 Ultrasonogram of a dog with a
pheochromocytoma invading the postcava. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

437

plasma catecholamines and their metabolites or urinary
­excretion of catecholamines and their metabolites, but
these tests are not widely available and the results are
not always reliable.

intravenously as necessary during surgery to control
tachycardia or tachyarrhythmias.

Management

Definition/overview

Surgical removal (Figures 11.80, 11.81) is the treatment of choice, but this should only be performed by
experienced surgeons since excessive handling of the
tumor during surgery may provoke massive secretion
of catecholamines and the tumors tend to be invasive.
Phentolamine, an alpha-adrenergic antagonist for IV
use, can be used at a dose of 0.02–0.1 mg/kg to lower
blood pressure while manipulating the tumor. However,
phenoxybenzamine (0.2–1.5 mg/kg PO q12h) may be the
drug of choice due to its long duration of action. Improved
surgical survival has been associated with the use of
oral phenoxybenzamine treatment for 2 weeks prior to
surgery. Lidocaine or propranolol can be administered

Diabetes mellitus is a heterogeneous syndrome in the
dog and cat rather than a single disease entity. It is characterized by a relative or absolute deficiency of insulin
secretion by the beta cells of the islets of Langerhans in
the pancreas.

11.80

A relative or absolute deficiency of insulin results in
decreased utilization of glucose, amino acids, and fatty
acids by peripheral tissues, particularly liver, muscle, and
adipose tissue. Failure of glucose uptake by these cells
leads to hyperglycemia. Once the renal threshold for glucose reabsorption is exceeded, an osmotic diuresis ensues
with loss of glucose, electrolytes, and water in the urine. A
compensatory polydipsia prevents the animal becoming
dehydrated. The loss of glucose leads to catabolism of the
body’s reserves, especially of fats. Excessive fat catabolism
leads to the production and accumulation of ketone bodies and the onset of diabetic ketoacidosis (Figure 11.82).
In diabetic ketoacidosis the patient is unable to maintain an adequate fluid intake and becomes rapidly dehydrated due to the uncontrolled osmotic diuresis. The

11.81

DIABETES MELLITUS

Etiology
Carbohydrate metabolism, and in particular blood glucose concentration, is controlled by the balance between
the action of catabolic hormones (e.g. glucagon, cortisol,
catecholamines, and GH) on the one hand and the principal anabolic hormone, insulin, on the other.

Pathophysiology

Reduced insulin
release
Increased
glucagon:insulin
ratio

11.82

Catecholamines
Lipolysis

Figures 11.80, 11.81 Surgical view (11.80) and resected
specimen (11.81) of a well-localized and noninvasive
pheochromocytoma. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C011.indd 437

Gluconeogenesis

Glycogenolysis

Ketogenesis

Cortisol,
growth
hormone

Hyperglycemia

Ketonemia

Reduced glucose
utilization

Figure 11.82 Etiology of diabetic ketoacidosis.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

438

Diseases of specific organ systems

dehydration and acidosis require emergency care if the
animal is to survive.
In humans diabetes is classified as type I insulin-­
dependent diabetes mellitus and type II noninsulin-­
dependent diabetes mellitus. This classification has not
proved very useful in veterinary medicine, since nearly all
dogs with diabetes mellitus require insulin therapy regardless of the underlying etiology. However, in cats, type II
diabetes mellitus is the most common form of the disease
and is characterized by variable loss of insulin secretory
capacity and insulin resistance. Classifying diabetes mellitus into primary and secondary causes is of more use clinically in the dog (Table 11.25). In secondary diabetes, which
is caused by peripheral insulin resistance, there is initially
a compensatory increase in insulin secretion, but after a
period of time the islet cells become exhausted, the beta
cells are destroyed, and their function is permanently lost.

Clinical presentation
Diabetes mellitus is a disease of middle aged dogs with
a peak incidence around 8 years of age. Genetic predisposition to diabetes has been found in Keeshonds and
Samoyeds. Cairn Terriers, Tibetan Terriers, Poodles, and
Dachshunds may also be overrepresented. Entire bitches
are more frequently affected than male dogs and this is
due mainly to the induction of GH by progesterone or
progestogens.
Diabetes mellitus is the second most common endocrine disorder in cats after hyperthyroidism. Its incidence
appears to be increasing, probably due to an increase in
obesity in the cat population. Several risk factors have
been identified including age, obesity, neutering, and
sex. The disease is seen in middle aged to older cats and
appears to be more common in males than females and in
neutered cats rather than entire cats.
Table 11.25 Etiology of diabetes mellitus in the dog and cat.

Polyuria, polydipsia, increased appetite, and weight
loss develop over a few weeks in uncomplicated cases
(Figure 11.83). In entire bitches this usually occurs in the
diestrus phase of the estrous cycle. Hepatomegaly, muscle
wasting, and infections of the urinary or respiratory tract
may be noted on clinical examination. Ulcerative skin
lesions and cutaneous xanthomata have occasionally
been reported. If the diabetes remains uncontrolled, an
accumulation of ketone bodies may occur, which causes
metabolic acidosis and leads to depression, anorexia,
vomiting, and rapid dehydration (Figure 11.84). Coma
and death may result from severe hypovolemia and circulatory collapse.

Differential diagnosis
Primary renal glycosuria, stress, hyperadrenocorticism,
pancreatitis, renal insufficiency, exocrine pancreatic neoplasia, acromegaly, diestrus, pheochromocytoma, postprandial hyperglycemia.
11.83

Figure 11.83 A 12-year-old Labrador Retriever with diabetes
mellitus. Note the weight loss.
11.84

Primary islet cell degeneration
Islet cell destruction (?autoimmune)
Chronic pancreatitis
Amyloidosis
Secondary diabetes mellitus
Obesity – causing downregulation of insulin receptors
Antagonism to insulin by counterregulatory hormones:
•• Hyperadrenocorticism
•• Progesterone-induced GH excess (dogs only)
•• Acromegaly
Antagonism to insulin by drug therapy:
•• Glucocorticoids
•• Progestogens

K22463_C011.indd 438

Figure 11.84 A 3-year-old Cavalier King Charles Spaniel in a
diabetic ketoacidotic coma.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

11.85

Diagnosis
Urinalysis reveals persistent glycosuria and often ketonuria. Despite the high solute load in the urine, which
would tend to increase the SG of the urine, many older
dogs and cats may have impaired renal concentrating
power and thus the SG of the urine is variable, typically
between 1.015 and 1.045. Bacterial cystitis is common
and occasionally may involve gas-producing organisms,
which can cause emphysematous cystitis (Figure 11.85).
Plasma biochemistry reveals hyperglycemia (>9 mmol/l
[>162 mg/dl]) and hyperlipidemia. In some patients the
blood will be lactescent due to lipemia. Liver enzymes
are usually raised and liver function tests such as bile
acid concentrations may be abnormal. In cases where
diabetes is associated with pancreatitis, canine or
­feline-specific pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity may
be elevated.
Diabetic ketoacidosis is often triggered by an underlying condition such as systemic inflammatory ­disease
(pancreatitis, urinary tract infection, pyometra, or pneumonia) or a condition that causes dehydration. In diabetic ketoacidosis there are serious derangements in
fluid, electrolyte, and acid–base status. The most frequent
abnormalities are prerenal azotemia, hyponatremia,
hypokalemia, and acidosis.

Management
Treatment can be divided into the acute management of
diabetic ketoacidosis and the stabilization of the uncomplicated diabetic. The ketoacidotic dog can be stabilized
as for the uncomplicated case, once it has started to feed
normally.

Acute management of diabetic ketoacidosis
Although the healthy (still eating and drinking) ketotic
diabetic can usually be managed conservatively without fluid therapy or intensive care, diabetic ketoacidosis
characterized by hyperglycemia, ketonemia, metabolic
acidosis, dehydration, and electrolyte imbalance is a
medical emergency that is associated with a high mortality. Treatment should consist of replacement of fluid and
electrolytes, reduction of blood glucose concentrations,
correction of acidosis, and identification of precipitating
causes. A treatment protocol is given in Table 11.26, but
diagnosis and treatment of the underlying trigger is also
important.

Fluid therapy
IV replacement of fluid and electrolytes is essential for
the successful management of diabetic ketoacidosis.
Unless serum electrolytes suggest otherwise, 0.9% sodium

K22463_C011.indd 439

439

Figure 11.85 Abdominal radiograph of a diabetic dog showing
emphysematous cystitis. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

chloride or lactated Ringer’s solution is the initial fluid of
choice. The fluid deficit is usually about 10% of body weight
and this should be replaced over a period of 24–48 hours.
Sodium chloride may be alternated with lactated Ringer’s
solution or, if the blood glucose falls below 10 mmol/l
(180 mg/dl), a solution containing 0.18% sodium chloride
and 4% glucose (or some other comparable isotonic crystalloid–glucose solution). Urine output should be measured and, if possible, a central venous catheter used so
that central venous pressure can be monitored during
fluid therapy.

Insulin therapy
Soluble insulin (‘regular’) should be used in the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis. Although intermittent
administration using the IV and IM routes has been used,
low-dose IV insulin infusion (0.1 U/kg/hour) is effective
and appears to be associated with fewer side-effects,
such as hypokalemia and hypoglycemia. Low-dose IV
insulin infusion provides a steady, gradual reduction
in blood glucose and ketone concentrations and is less
likely to cause the increases in glucagon, cortisol, and
GH that can occur with intermittent bolus administration of insulin.
Blood glucose should be monitored every 2 hours.
Glucose-containing fluids should be introduced when
the blood glucose concentration falls below 10 mmol/l
(180 mg/dl) and the insulin infusion should be stopped
when the blood glucose reaches 6 mmol/l (108 mg/dl).
Once the insulin infusion is halted, blood glucose concentrations will increase, so that further infusion of
insulin may be required if the patient is not eating or a
­longer-acting insulin preparation may be introduced if
its appetite has returned.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

440

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 11.26 Treatment protocol for diabetic ketoacidosis in the dog.
Intravenous fluid and electrolyte replacement
•• 0.9% sodium chloride initially then alternate with lactated Ringer’s solution. Monitor urine output and, if possible, central
venous pressure
Insulin therapy
•• Low-dose insulin infusion. Add 25 units soluble (Regular) insulin to 500 ml 0.9% sodium chloride solution or 2.5 units in a 50 ml
syringe (0.05 U/ml) and infuse at a rate of 0.1 U/kg/hour through a separate IV catheter. Use of an infusion pump, syringe
driver or pediatric burette is helpful in controlling the rate of infusion. Monitor blood glucose concentration every 2 hours
•• Soluble insulin injection. A dose of 1 U/kg is divided and one-quarter of the dose given IV and three-quarters IM. The dose is
repeated every 4–6 hours. Monitor blood glucose concentration every 2 hours
Continue intravenous fluid and electrolyte replacement
•• Continue alternating 0.9% sodium chloride with lactated Ringer’s solution while blood glucose remains >10 mmol/l
(>180 mg/dl). Use 0.18% sodium chloride with 4% glucose solution when blood glucose falls to <10 mmol/l (<180 mg/dl)
Potassium supplementation
•• Ideally, supplementation with potassium should be based on serum potassium concentrations. In the absence of serum
­potassium measurements, add 20 mmol/l (20 mEq/l) of potassium chloride to each 500 ml bag of IV fluid solution. Two to
three times more potassium will be necessary with potassium concentrations <3.0 mmol/l. The rate of administration should
not exceed 0.5 mmol/kg/hour, although in dire circumstances (potassium <2.0 mmol/l), the rate can be increased to
1.5 mmol/kg/hour with simultaneous ECG monitoring. This treatment will be safe providing the patient has adequate urine
production
Phosphate supplementation
•• Phosphate shifts in the same way as potassium. Hypophosphatemia is only likely to occur in severe diabetic ketoacidosis,
but can be severe (<0.5 mmol/l [0.5 mEq/l]). Dose of 0.01–0.03 mmol/kg/hour of potassium phosphate in calcium-free fluid
(e.g. normal saline) is required if hypophosphatemia is detected. In cases of severe hypophosphatemia, the dose may be
increased to 0.12 mmol/kg/hour
Correction of acidosis
•• Bicarbonate therapy is not necessary provided renal function has been re-established. It is only indicated in l­ife-threatening
(pH <7.0) acidosis and only one-third of the calculated replacement dose should be used to prevent excessive blood
HCO3− concentrations
Antibiotic therapy
•• If indicated

Potassium supplementation

Phosphate supplementation

A deficit in total body potassium is usually masked by
the acidosis, which sometimes causes potassium to
move extracellularly. Serum potassium concentration
can decrease rapidly as renal function improves and
insulin therapy causes potassium to move back into the
cells. Although hypokalemia is less likely to occur with
low-dose insulin infusion, replacement therapy should
be started within a few hours of instigating fluid and
insulin therapy. In the absence of serum potassium
­
­measurements, 20 mmol of potassium chloride should
be added to every 500 ml of IV fluid solution. Insulin
­treatment is best delayed for several hours if the patient
is initially hypokalemic in order to avoid a further
lowering of the serum potassium concentration (see
Table 11.26).

Phosphate moves between the intracellular and extracellular compartments in the same way as potassium.
Hypophosphatemia can cause hemolytic anemia, weakness, ataxia, and seizures. Phosphate supplementation is
only usually required in dogs and cats with severe diabetic
ketoacidosis. Potassium phosphate (0.01–0.03 mmol/kg/
hour IV) is recommended to correct hypophosphatemia.

K22463_C011.indd 440

Bicarbonate therapy
The use of sodium bicarbonate to correct the acidosis in
diabetic ketoacidosis is controversial. Rapid correction of
the acidosis with bicarbonate can lead to metabolic alkalosis, tissue anoxia due to a shift to the left of the hemoglobin–oxygen dissociation curve, and paradoxical cerebral
acidosis because carbon dioxide crosses the blood–brain

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

barrier more rapidly than bicarbonate ions. For these reasons, bicarbonate should be used only in life-threatening
acidosis (arterial pH <7.0). Provided normal renal function is restored and adequate fluid therapy is given, the
acidosis will resolve without bicarbonate administration.

Antibiotic therapy
Initially, broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy might be
preferred by some clinicians because bacterial infection
is a common precipitating factor for diabetic ketoacidosis
and the use of IV and urinary catheters may predispose
the patient to infection.

Concurrent problems
Other common concurrent illnesses in the dog and cat
with diabetic ketoacidosis include pancreatitis, renal failure, CHF, hyperadrenocorticism, and pyometra. Entire
bitches may be resistant to insulin therapy during the
diestrus phase of their estrous cycle, thus requiring
ovario-hysterectomy as soon as the patient is physiologically stable during the first 2–3 days of hospitalization.

Stabilization of uncomplicated diabetes mellitus
The primary goal of diabetes therapy is to maintain normoglycemia and thereby control the signs that occur secondary to hyperglycemia and glycosuria and result in the
development of complications (Table 11.27). The essentials of good stabilization of diabetes mellitus require
understanding by the owner and adherence to a regular
daily routine that involves diet, insulin administration,
and regular controlled exercise. Stabilization can be carried out satisfactorily at home but, particularly if the
patient is ketotic, it may be preferable to hospitalize the
animal during stabilization, since it is easier to monitor
blood glucose more closely.
Most diabetic dogs are presented with complete islet
cell degeneration and atrophy. Therefore, diabetes
Table 11.27 Complications associated with diabetes mellitus.
Hypoglycemia
Ketoacidosis
Cataract formation
Hepatic lipidosis
Pancreatitis
Infections
Retinopathy
Diabetic neuropathy
Diabetic nephropathy
Skin disease

K22463_C011.indd 441

441

mellitus in dogs is insulin dependent. Rarely, bitches may
be presented during the diestrus phase of the estrous
cycle before islet cell exhaustion has occurred. If ovariohysterectomy is performed in these patients immediately
the signs of diabetes become apparent, there can be complete resolution of the disease. However, in the majority
of bitches this opportunity is missed or goes unnoticed
and permanent damage to the islet cells occurs.
While a small percentage of cats may respond to diet
and oral hypoglycemic agents, principally glipizide (a
sulfonylurea), it is generally considered that insulin provides better glycemic control and, therefore, more chance
of attaining diabetic remission. Remission of diabetes in
cats usually occurs within 1 month of beginning insulin
therapy, but can occur as late as 6–8 months after the start
of treatment.

Dietary therapy
Appropriate dietary therapy is an essential part of the
management of diabetes. The diet must be well-balanced
and constant in both composition and the amount fed at
each meal. It is therefore most convenient to use a commercial diet. Canned or dry foods that contain digestible
complex carbohydrates should be fed, as slow digestion
minimizes the fluctuations in postprandial blood glucose
concentrations. Semi-moist foods containing a predominance of easily assimilated carbohydrates in the form
of disaccharides and propylene glycol should be avoided
because of marked postprandial hyperglycemia. There is
evidence that diets with a high-fiber content improve glycemic control by delaying starch hydrolysis and glucose
absorption, thereby reducing postprandial fluctuations
in blood glucose. High-fiber diets are also beneficial in
correcting obesity. However, there may be disadvantages
in using high-fiber diets (e.g. reduced palatability and the
fact that the low caloric density may cause patients to lose
excessive weight or fail to gain weight if already below
ideal body weight). The author tends to reserve high-fiber
diets for those patients that are difficult to stabilize and/
or are obese.
Correction of obesity and minimizing the impact of
the diet on postprandial blood glucose concentrations
are also important dietary considerations in diabetic
cats. Following weight reduction, glycemic control often
improves and, in some cats, remission of diabetes may
occur. Although high-fiber diets have been used in cats
with diabetes, palatability can prove a problem. More
recently, high-protein, low-carbohydrate diets have been
used in the management of feline diabetes. Since cats are

25/04/16 11:03 pm

442

Diseases of specific organ systems

strict carnivores and maintain their blood glucose mainly
through gluconeogenesis from amino acids, these diets
produce a more stable blood glucose level and insulin
requirements are reduced.
Finally, the feeding schedule should be designed to
enhance the action of insulin and minimize postprandial hyperglycemia. The daily caloric intake should occur
when insulin is present in the circulation and capable of
handling glucose absorbed from the intestine. Several
small meals are preferable to one large feed, as these
will help minimize postprandial hyperglycemia and thus
help to control fluctuations in blood glucose. The author
routinely recommends two equal meals fed at times to
coincide with insulin activity. In cases that prove difficult to stabilize, 3–4 smaller meals are fed during the day.
Titbits and scavenging must be avoided as they tend to
destabilize diabetic patients.

Insulin therapy
For routine stabilization in the dog, insulin zinc suspension (lente), which contains a mixture of 30% insulin zinc suspension (amorphous) and 70% insulin zinc
suspension (crystalline), is the preparation of choice in
the UK. When given by subcutaneous injection it is an
­intermediate-acting insulin with an onset of activity at
1–2 hours, peak activity around 6–12 hours, and a duration of action of between 18 and 26 hours in the dog. The
times for peak activity and duration of action vary with
the individual, but in some dogs once daily administration is adequate, although in the majority of cases twice
daily administation is required to maintain good glycemic control. In the USA, most clinicians use NPH insulin,
which has a shorter duration of action, and administer it
to diabetic dogs in a divided twice daily dosage.
Cats tend to metabolize insulin more quickly than dogs;
therefore, a long-acting insulin such as protamine zinc
insulin is often recommended if once daily dosing is to
be tried, although PZI is often administered twice daily as
with other intermediate to long-acting insulins. However
many clinicians use twice daily dosing with lente insulin
to gain good glycemic control. Insulin glargine, a long-­
acting insulin analog, has been used in cats with encouraging results (a dose of 0.25–0.5 U/kg q24h or q12h has
been recommended). Insulin glargine forms microprecipitates at the site of injection from which small amounts of
insulin are slowly released.
Lente insulin can be given as a single morning injection at the same time as or just before the first meal, with
the second meal given 6–8 hours later to coincide with
peak insulin activity. However, because of the frequency
of hypoglycemia associated with once daily treatment,
the lente insulin can also be given in a divided twice daily

K22463_C011.indd 442

treatment protocol (see below). An initial dose of between
0.5 and 1.0 U/kg is used. Insulin is probably best dosed on
body surface area rather than a simple weight basis. Thus,
small dogs (<15 kg) tend to require 1.0 U/kg and larger
dogs (>25 kg) receive 0.5 U/kg. Although the subcutaneous route is ideal for long-term use, the intramuscular
route may be used initially, especially in dehydrated or
‘healthy’ ketotic animals, because absorption from subcutaneous depots in these patients may be slow and erratic.
Regular insulin can also be given by the intramuscular or
intravenous route.
Insulin should be administered using specific 0.3, 0.5,
or 1.0 ml syringes calibrated in units (100 U/ml or 40 U/ml
depending on the concentration of the preparation).
Insulin preparations should be stored in a refrigerator at
2–8°C (35.6–46.4°F) because they are adversely affected by
heat or freezing. Preparations should be rolled gently to
resuspend the particles before use. A diabetic patient will
usually take 2–4 days to respond fully to a dose of insulin or a change in preparation. It is important to avoid
increasing the dose too quickly before equilibration has
occurred, as this can lead to a sudden and precipitous fall
in blood glucose due to overdosage with insulin. In most
cases, adjustments in the insulin dose should be made in
small changes of 1–4 units per injection, depending on the
size of the patient and the severity of the hyperglycemia.
The type of preparation and frequency of administration
may require alteration in those patients that prove difficult to stabilize with this standard routine. However, it is
good for the clinician to become familiar with one type of
insulin preparation and only change from that preparation if the insulin is the cause of the instability.
The standard routine for a dog would be:
8.00 am Give lente insulin injection SC
8.30 am Feed half of the measured daily ration
2.30 pm Feed second half of the daily ration
for once daily treatment (although administering the
insulin in divided doses SC is recommended) and:
8.00 am Give lente insulin injection subcutaneously
8.30 am Feed half of the measured daily ration
8.00 pm Give lente insulin injection subcutaneously
8.30   pm 
Feed second half of the measured daily
ration for twice daily treatment.
Keep the daily routine constant, including exercise; avoid
titbits and scavenging.

Monitoring therapy
Ideally, monitoring should consist of serial blood glucose
concentrations, as tighter diabetic control can be gained
than with urine glucose estimations. Initially, at least two

25/04/16 11:03 pm

Endocrine disorders

blood glucose estimations should be made, one before
insulin is administered and the second just before the
second feed. Once the patient appears fairly stable, more
frequent blood samples should be taken throughout the
day to assess the degree of stabilization. An assessment
of daily water intake can also provide useful information
about the degree of diabetic control.
Blood glucose concentrations should ideally be maintained at between 5 and 9 mmol/l (90 and 162 mg/dl)
(Figure 11.86). The blood glucose concentration will usually be highest in the morning before insulin is administered and lowest just before the second feed. A trace of
glucose in the morning urine sample may be acceptable,
but the urine should be negative at other times in the day.
However, it is important to remember that urine glucose
may not reflect the blood glucose concentration at the
same point in time and, if the urine glucose is negative,
the blood glucose concentration could be hypoglycemic
(<3.0 mmol/l [<54 mg/dl]), normoglycemic, or hyperglycemic (>5.5 mmol/l [>99 mg/dl]). Although the author’s clients monitor urine for glucose and ketones regularly, he
does not advocate adjusting daily insulin dosages on the
basis of morning urine glucose measurements. Instead,
he prefers to continue with a fixed insulin dosage unless
the patient remains unstable for more than several days.
Measurement of glycated proteins such as fructosamine and glycosylated Hgb are used increasingly
in the dog and cat to monitor the response to treatment.
The irreversible, nonenzymatic glycation process occurs
throughout the life span of the protein, mainly albumin
11.86

Blood glucose mmol/l (mg/dl)

10 (180)
9 (162)
8 (144)
7 (126)

443

in the case of fructosamine, and is proportional to the
glucose concentration over that time. These measurements reflect the average blood glucose concentration
over the preceding 1–2 weeks in the case of serum fructosamine and 2–3 months in the case of glycosylated Hgb.
Fructosamine concentrations <400 mmol/l indicate good
glycemic control, whereas concentrations >500 mmol/l
are found in newly diagnosed or poorly controlled diabetics. Glycosylated Hgb is less routinely available as an
assay. Well-controlled diabetic dogs have between 4% and
6% glycosylated Hgb, whereas poorly controlled diabetics
have concentrations >7%.
Diabetic records (Figure 11.87) should be kept by the
owner for each patient, as alterations to stability can
be assessed more easily over a period of time. Insulin
requirements will be increased by infection, estrus (particularly the metestrus phase of the cycle), pregnancy,
and ketoacidosis. It is therefore recommended that entire
bitches should undergo ovariohysterectomy in order to
avoid insulin resistance at subsequent seasons.

Investigation of instability
If a patient appears to be poorly stabilized at home despite
repeated attempts to provide adequate glycemic control,
the diabetic record should be checked and the patient
examined for signs of disease that could cause insulin
resistance (e.g. infection, estrus, pregnancy, ketoacidosis,
hyperadrenocorticism, or acromegaly). The daily routine
should be discussed with the owner to make sure that the
diet is constant and measured and that there is no access
to titbits or scavenging. The insulin preparation should
be checked for type, expiry date, and storage, as should
the ability of the owner to administer the insulin (adequate mixing, correct dosage, and injection technique).
If an obvious cause cannot be determined, the patient
should be hospitalized on its daily routine and serial
blood glucose determinations made every 1–2 hours
throughout the day. Determinations made with glucose
11.87

6 (108)
Date

5 (90)

08.00hr

06.00hr

04.00hr

02.00hr

24.00hr

22.00hr

20.00hr

18.00hr

16.00hr

14.00hr

12.00hr

10.00hr

08.00hr

4 (72)

Urine
exam

Insulin
dose & time of
injection

18 units
am
15
lente insulin
glucose-ve
March
s.c.
ketones-ve
8.00 am

Drink

Body
weight

Blood
results

Note

3/4 tin
Dogga
0.9 L
8.30 am
2.30 pm

24 kg

2.00 pm
blood
glucose
4.6 mmol/l

Bright
and
alert

Food

Time
Patient

Figure 11.86 Ideal blood glucose curve.

K22463_C011.indd 443

Figure 11.87 Diabetic record.

25/04/16 11:03 pm

444

Diseases of specific organ systems

reagent strips and a glucose meter are simple, fast, and
sufficiently accurate for this purpose. Some owners are
prepared to record these measurements at home environment, which is useful as it provides a more realistic
assessment of the patient in its own home environment.
The use of a continuous glucose monitoring system has
proved useful but is more expensive. The results should
then be plotted on a graph against time, although it is
important to realize that precise glucose curves may vary
from day to day in any diabetic patient.
Three major causes of instability can be deduced from
the graph of serial blood glucose determinations:

●● The first is insulin-induced hyperglycemia, also
called the Somogyi overswing, where excessive
insulin dosage leads to paradoxical hyperglycemia
(Figure 11.88). The blood glucose concentration is
high in the morning before insulin is given, but
falls sharply to hypoglycemic concentrations (<3.5
mmol/l [<63.1 mg/dl]) after insulin administration.
The hypoglycemic period is short in duration and is
not associated with signs of hypoglycemia. In fact,
the nadir can easily be missed if frequent sampling is
not performed. The low blood glucose concentration
stimulates the release of hormones antagonistic to
insulin (e.g. glucagon, cortisol, and catecholamines),
and these cause the glucose concentration to rebound

quickly to high levels. If blood glucose and/or urine
glucose concentrations were measured only before
insulin and before the second feed, the concentrations would be high and this could easily be misinterpreted as a reason for increasing the daily insulin
dose, when in fact the patient is already being overdosed. The treatment for insulin-induced hyperglycemia is to reduce the daily dose of insulin in order to
prevent the hypoglycemia that causes the dramatic
swing in blood glucose concentrations.
●● The second cause of instability is due to rapid metabolism of insulin, which means that an intermediateacting insulin preparation does not last for a full 24
hours (Figure 11.89). In such cases the blood glucose
concentration is high in the morning before insulin
is given, but falls to normal levels for much of the
day. However, after the second feed the blood glucose
concentration rises and remains high for the remainder of the day. This leads to a considerable period of
hyperglycemia and results in glycosuria in the morning and often nocturnal polydipsia and polyuria. The
treatment for rapid insulin metabolism is either to try
a longer-acting insulin ­preparation (e.g. protamine
zinc insulin or insulin glargine [Note: Ultralente is
no longer available in the USA]) or to ­administer two
doses of lente insulin 12 hours apart, with two meals

11.88

20 (360)
15 (270)
10 (180)
5 (90)
2.5 (45)

20 (360)

15 (270)

10 (180)

5 (90)

Time
Patient
Ideal diabetic curve

Figure 11.88 Insulin-induced hyperglycemia (Somogyi
overswing).

06.00hr

08.00hr

04.00hr

02.00hr

24.00hr

22.00hr

20.00hr

18.00hr

16.00hr

14.00hr

12.00hr

10.00hr

0
08.00hr

08.00hr

06.00hr

04.00hr

02.00hr

24.00hr

22.00hr

20.00hr

18.00hr

16.00hr

14.00hr

12.00hr

10.00hr

08.00hr

0

K22463_C011.indd 444

11.89

25 (450)
Blood glucose mmol/l (mg/dl)

Blood glucose mmol/l (mg/dl)

25 (450)

Time
Patient
Ideal diabetic curve

Figure 11.89 Rapid metabolism of insulin.

25/04/16 11:04 pm

Endocrine disorders

at the time of injection or four small meals given at
approximately 6-hour intervals.
●● The third cause of instability is associated with insulin resistance. In these cases the animal remains persistently hyperglycemic despite an insulin dosage
of more than 2.2 U/kg/day (Figure 11.90). Although
some patients can be stabilized satisfactorily at doses
higher than this, peripheral antagonism to insulin activity is likely to be present. In cases where
adequate stabilization is not possible, a thorough
investigation of the patient is required to try and
identify the precise cause of the insulin resistance.
Some of the causes of insulin resistance are listed in
Table 11.28. Correction or treatment of the underlying cause will usually enable the patient to be
stabilized at a lower dose of insulin with improved
glycemic control.

INSULINOMA
Definition/overview
Functional islet cell tumors (insulinomas) are the most
frequently occurring tumors of the endocrine pancreas
in dogs. Most insulin-secreting tumors are malignant
islet cell carcinomas that metastasize to regional lymph

11.90

Blood glucose mmol/l (mg/dl)

30 (540)
25 (450)
20 (360)
15 (270)

nodes and/or the liver. Early diagnosis is important, as
dogs with metastases have significantly reduced survival
times.

Etiology
Causes of episodic weakness (Table 11.24), causes of hypoglycemia in adults (Table 11.29).

Pathophysiology
Insulinomas release insulin despite the presence of hypoglycemia. Hypoglycemia is normally the major inhibitory
stimulus for insulin secretion. As a result of hyperinsulinism, tissue utilization of glucose continues, the hypoglycemia worsens, and ultimately clinical signs develop. The
onset and severity of clinical signs are determined by the
degree of hypoglycemia and the rate at which the plasma
concentration of glucose falls. A rapid decline in plasma
glucose concentration may occur with fasting, exercise,
or excitement in dogs with insulinomas. The brain is an
obligate consumer of glucose. Cerebral cells have limited
stores of glycogen and a limited ability to utilize protein
and amino acids for energy. These cells will be the first

Table 11.28 Causes of insulin resistance.
Obesity
Hyperadrenocorticism
Exogenous glucocorticoid administration
Metestrus phase of the estrous cycle
Exogenous progestogen administration
Acromegaly
Hypothyroidism
Hyperthyroidism
Impaired absorption of insulin
Excessive insulin antibody formation
Pheochromocytoma
Glucagonoma

10 (180)
5 (90)

Table 11.29 Differential diagnosis of hypoglycemia in dogs.

Time
Patient
Ideal diabetic curve

Figure 11.90 Insulin resistance.

08.00hr

06.00hr

04.00hr

02.00hr

24.00hr

22.00hr

20.00hr

18.00hr

16.00hr

14.00hr

12.00hr

10.00hr

08.00hr

0

K22463_C011.indd 445

445

Incorrect anticoagulant/delayed separation of serum from
red blood cells
Functional islet cell tumor (insulinoma)
Excessive insulin administration
Extrapancreatic tumors, particularly hepatic tumors
Liver disease
Septicemic or endotoxic shock
Hypoadrenocorticism
Idiopathic hypoglycemia in working dogs
Severe polycythemia

25/04/16 11:04 pm

446

Diseases of specific organ systems

affected by hypoglycemia. Prolonged and profound hypoglycemia causes ischemic neuronal cell damage.
Hypoglycemia is a potent stimulus for the release of
hormones that have an antagonistic action to insulin.
These include glucagon, GH, glucocorticoids, catecholamines, and possibly thyroid hormones. These hormones
act in concert to raise the plasma glucose concentration.
Some of the clinical manifestations of hypoglycemia,
such as muscle tremors, nervousness, restlessness, and
hunger, may in fact result from stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system and increased levels of circulating
catecholamines.

Clinical presentation
Insulinomas usually occur in middle aged to older dogs
(mean age of 9 years) of any breed, although medium
to large breeds appear to be predisposed. No sex predisposition has been reported. Insulinomas appear to be
very rare in cats. A tentative diagnosis of hyperinsulinism is generally based on fulfilment of the criteria from
Whipple’s triad:
1.

2.
3.

The presence of neurologic signs typical of hypoglycemia, which may be precipitated by exercise or
excitement.
Hypoglycemia (plasma glucose <3 mmol/l [<54 mg/dl])
at the time of the clinical signs.
Resolution of clinical signs following feeding or
administration of intravenous glucose.

Clinical signs associated with hypoglycemia include
fatigue, generalized weakness, collapse, muscle tremors,
altered behavior, confusion/disorientation, apparent
blindness, ataxia, incoordination, stupor, and seizures.
These signs are usually episodic in nature and may occur
with fasting, exercise, or excitement in dogs with insulinomas. Provocative stimuli, such as IV administration of
glucagon or glucose, result in excessive secretion of insulin from neoplastic beta cells. This response may be even
greater if glucose is administered orally, as numerous
intestinal hormones (glucagon, secretin, cholecystokinin, gastrin, and gastric inhibitory peptide) are secreted
in response to oral glucose and these in turn increase
insulin secretion. It is by this mechanism that feeding
has been reported to initiate clinical signs in dogs with
insulinomas.
Seizure activity is one of the most common clinical manifestations of hypoglycemia. The seizures may be grand
mal or focal in nature and are normally s­elf-limiting,
lasting between 30 seconds and 5 minutes. Peripheral
neuropathy with nerve degeneration and demyelination

K22463_C011.indd 446

has also been associated with canine insulinoma in a few
cases. Insulinomas are generally small tumors and do not
lead to malignant cachexia. Thus weight loss is not a feature of this disease.

Diagnosis
Laboratory findings
A presumptive diagnosis of insulinoma is based on the
presence of typical clinical signs in association with
persistent hypoglycemia and an inappropriately high
plasma insulin concentration. A fasting plasma glucose
concentration of 3 mmol/l (54 mg/dl) or less is found in
most cases. Some dogs with insulinoma show no clinical
signs despite having extremely low blood glucose concentrations (<2 mmol/l [<36 mg/dl]) because they are able
to adapt to these low concentrations over a prolonged
period of time. Serum fructosamine concentrations are
also reduced (<250 µmol/l), supporting substantial periods of hypoglycemia even in those patients with normal
or low-normal fasting blood glucose concentrations.
Plasma insulin concentrations greater than 20 mU/l in
association with hypoglycemia are inappropriate and an
insulin:glucose ratio >4.2 is considered diagnostic.
In borderline cases an IV glucose tolerance test using
0.5 g glucose/kg body weight has proved useful. Insulinsecreting tumors retain a degree of responsiveness to the
glucose challenge; a glucose half-life of <20 minutes and/
or a fractional clearance rate of more than 3%/minute is
highly suggestive of insulinoma in the dog.
Although hypoalbuminemia, hypokalemia, and
increases in serum ALP concentrations have occasionally
been reported, these findings are not specific or helpful in
achieving a definitive diagnosis.

Ultrasonography
Abdominal ultrasonography using a high-quality diagnostic ultrasound machine has been used to examine the
pancreas of dogs with suspected insulinomas. Most insulinomas are quite small (<4 cm) and are isoechoic when
compared with the surrounding pancreatic tissue. In one
study a pancreatic mass was identified as a spherical or
lobular hypoechoic nodule in 75% of dogs with insulinomas (Figure 11.91). Tumors as small as 7 mm have been
identified in the pancreas. However, ultrasonography has
proved less sensitive compared with CT for the detection
of hepatic or lymphatic metastases from insulinomas.

Management
Management of insulinomas should be directed at specific
treatment of the tumor, reduction of insulin secretion,
and correction of hypoglycemia. Sometimes, IV glucagon

25/04/16 11:04 pm

Endocrine disorders

is needed to increase the blood glucose to desirably safe
levels. The initial glucagon dose is 50.0 ng/kg as an IV
bolus followed with a maintenance dose of 5–10 ng/kg/
minute.

Surgical management
Surgical resection of the pancreatic tumor and metastatic
tumor masses should be the first approach to therapy
(Figure 11.92–11.94). Most insulinomas are located in the
left lobe of the pancreas, with masses in the right lobe
or body occurring less frequently. Tumors are usually
solitary, but multiple masses may occur. Rarely, there is
a diffuse islet cell tumor with no discrete nodule. There
does not appear to be a difference in survival in relation to tumor location within the pancreas, but there is a

447

suggestion that tumors with a high mitotic count carry a
worse prognosis.
Postoperative recovery is routine in many cases, but
complications including pancreatitis, hyperglycemia,
overt diabetes mellitus, and hypoglycemia occur. In
nearly all cases, hypoglycemia will recur eventually due
to metastasis.

Medical management
Medical management should be used if widespread
metastasis is present or if hypoglycemia recurs after
surgery. This should consist of dietary control (frequent
small meals of a diet high in proteins, fats, and complex
carbohydrates) and the use of prednisolone, which inhibits insulin and stimulates glycogenolysis, and diazoxide,

11.91

11.92

MASS
Figure 11.91 Ultrasonogram of the pancreas of a crossbred
dog showing a hypoechoic mass, which proved to be an
insulinoma on histology.

Figure 11.92 An insulinoma being pointed out at surgery
(arrow).

11.93

11.94

Figure 11.93, 11.94 Surgical view of an insulinoma before (arrow) and during its ligation for removal. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C011.indd 447

25/04/16 11:04 pm

448

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 11.30 Management of hypoglycemia.
•• In acute hypoglycemic crisis, give 1 ml/kg of a 40–50%
glucose solution by slow IV injection or, if the animal is
still conscious, provide a meal containing glucose. Glucose
administration is an emergency treatment and cannot be
used for long-term control
•• Management of chronic hypoglycemia requires a combination of therapies:
○○ Diet: feed small meals high in protein and low in simple
sugars 5–6 times daily
○○ Exercise should be restricted
○○ Diabetogenic drugs:
■■ Glucocorticoids: prednisolone (0.5–1 mg/kg daily in
divided doses)
■■ Diazoxide, a nondiuretic benzothiadiazine antihypertensive drug that acts by suppressing insulin
secretion (10 mg/kg in divided doses increasing up
to 60 mg/kg daily if necessary)
■■ Octreotide, a long-acting somatostatin analog that
inhibits insulin synthesis and secretion (10–20 µg
SC q12h or q8h). Only effective in some dogs. Close
monitoring required
■■ Streptozotocin and alloxan are nephrotoxic and not
recommended

K22463_C011.indd 448

a nondiuretic, benzothiadiazine antihypertensive drug
that inhibits insulin secretion (Table 11.30). Octreotide, a
somatostatin analog that inhibits insulin synthesis and
secretion, has also been used and has been shown to be
effective in some cases.
The prognosis is guarded due to the malignant nature
of the disease. However, many dogs do well with medical and surgical management. The median time to recurrence of clinical signs after surgery is 12 months (range
4–16 months) and the median postoperative survival
time is 14 months (range 10–33 months).

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (2010) (eds.) Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 7th edn. Elsevier Saunders, St Louis.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Reusch C et al. (2015) (eds.) Canine and
Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 4th edn. Elsevier, St
Louis.
Mooney CT, Peterson ME (2012) (eds.) BSAVA Manual of
Endocrinology, 4th edn. British Small Animal Veterinary
Association, Gloucester.
Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS (2010) (eds.) Clinical Endocrinology of
Dogs and Cats, 2nd edn. Schluetersche, Germany.

26/04/16 1:33 am

449

Chapter 12
Nephrology/urology
Mark J. Acierno

INTRODUCTION

Table 12.1 Causes of prerenal azotemia.

The kidneys are responsible for maintaining the body’s
fluid and electrolyte balance, filtering metabolic waste,
and performing several hormonal functions. Reduced
renal function manifests itself in several ways including increased blood levels of blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
and creatinine. The increase in these nitrogenous compounds is referred to as azotemia. Uremia refers to the
constellation of clinical signs that results from azotemia
and includes vomiting, lethargy, anorexia, diarrhea, oral
ulcerations, and uremic breath.
Azotemia is categorized by its underlying cause. This is
clinically important because not all azotemia is the result
of actual renal disease. Prerenal and postrenal factors
can result in increased levels of nitrogenous compounds
despite otherwise healthy kidneys.

Hypotension

Anesthesia
Dehydration
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison’s disease)
Hemorrhage

Hypoperfusion

Cardiac disease

Thrombosis

Renal artery or vein obstruction

●● Prerenal azotemia is the result of decreased kidney
perfusion in the absence of existing renal disease or
injury. Decreased renal blood flow leads to a reduction in glomerular filtration and a compensatory activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system.
The ensuing increase in tubular sodium reabsorption
and antidiuretic hormone-induced water reabsorption leads to production of low sodium concentrated
urine. Clinically, this is important, as the hallmark of
prerenal azotemia is mild to moderate azotemia with
an increased urine specific gravity (USG). Treatment
of the underlying condition (Table 12.1) will often
lead to resolution of clinical signs with no residual
renal compromise.
●● Postrenal azotemia can result from either an obstruction in urine outflow or leakage of urine into the abdomen. With a urinary obstruction, the blockage causes
increased pressure proximal to the impasse. This
results in increased hydrostatic pressure in Bowman’s
capsule and decreased glomerular filtration rate
(GFR). This is most commonly observed in urethral
obstructions since single ureteral obstructions leave

K22463_C012.indd 449

one kidney functioning normally; however, azotemia
can occur with unilateral ureteral obstructions if a
patient has pre-existing kidney disease. A rupture of
the urinary tract results in the accumulation of fluid
in the abdomen. Because urea is highly diffusible, it
is quickly resorbed back into circulation while creatinine, which is not diffusible, becomes trapped in the
fluid. Patients who experience a rupture of the urinary tract develop an accumulation of fluid that has
a BUN comparable to serum plasma but a creatinine
that is elevated.
●● Renal azotemia is a direct result of renal parenchymal disease.
Because of differing etiology, prognosis, and ­treatment,
primary renal disease is classified clinically into acute
kidney injury (AKI) or chronic kidney disease (CKD) and
histologically as glomerular or tubular disease.
Differentiation between AKI and CKD is important in
determining etiology, prognosis, and treatment options
(Table 12.2). Immediate intervention and aggressive
therapy are more likely to produce clinical recovery
in AKI since underlying causes may be identified and
treated. In addition, if significant numbers of nephrons
are unaffected, these will undergo hypertrophy and compensate for the damaged ones. Lastly, damaged nephrons
are capable of recovering from some insults if given sufficient time.
It is unlikely that a treatable cause of kidney disease
will be identified in the CKD patient. Also, it is doubtful

25/04/16 11:09 pm

450

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 12.2 Differentiation of acute kidney injury (AKI) and
chronic kidney disease (CKD).
AKI

CKD

History

Exposure to
­toxins or drugs
Acute illness
Ischemic episode

PU/PD for
some time
Anorexia
Weight loss over
extended period

Body condition

Normal

Thin/emaciated

Renal size
(radiography/
ultrasound)

Normal/increased

Small and
irregular

Packed cell
volume

Normal/increased

Anemia

Acidosis

Moderate/severe

Moderate

Serum potassium

Normal/increased

Normal/
decreased

Osteodystrophy

None

Table 12.3 Common causes of acute kidney injury.
Nephrotoxins

Ethylene glycol
Toxic plants (e.g. lilies [cats]; grapes
[dogs])
Melamine
Jerky treats (cause undetermined)
NSAIDs
Aminoglycosides
Amphotericin B
Cisplatin and carboplatin
Cyclosporin

Infectious agents

Leptospirosis
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Ehrlichiosis
Babesiosis
Leishmaniasis
Pyelonephritis

Systemic disease

Heat stroke

Ischemia

Hypotension (e.g. anesthetic induced)

Some cases
­(rubber jaw)

that remaining nephrons have additional c­ ompensatory
capacity and there is little hope for nephron repair.
Treatment in the CKD patient is more directed toward
supportive care. Although differentiation between the
two conditions is essential, there is no single test to discriminate between the two. Diagnosis is made based on a
combination of history, clinical signs, physical examination findings, and diagnostic tests.

Development of azotemia after an insult to the kidney is
dependent on a combination of four features:
1.

2.

ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY
Definition/overview
AKI is a condition characterized by a rapidly progressive
impairment in the kidney’s ability to filter metabolic
waste, as well as maintain the body’s fluid and electrolyte
balance.

Etiology
AKI is the result of damage that can be caused by
ischemia, nephrotoxins, infectious agents, or systemic
­
disease (Table 12.3). In companion animal medicine, AKI
is most commonly the result of exposure to toxins and
infectious agents.

Pathophysiology
There are many specific mechanisms by which the k
­ idney
can be injured. The pathophysiology of the most ­common
causes of renal failure can be found in Table 12.4.

K22463_C012.indd 450

3.

4.

Injury decreases glomerular permeability (Figure 12.1)
and causes vasoconstriction (Figure 12.2). This
directly reduces GFR and ultrafiltrate production.
Filtration of the blood ­significantly decreases.
As a result of the injury, dead epithelial cells, c­ ellular
debris, and proteins are discarded into the tubular lumen and form obstructive casts (Figure 12.3).
Ethylene glycol exposure results in calcium oxalate
crystals precipitating and causing tubular obstruction. Lastly, acute swelling and inflammation of the
damaged renal parenchyma externally compresses
renal tubules. These obstructive forces increase
hydrostatic pressure within Bowman’s capsule and
arrest glomerular filtration.
The death of tubular epithelial cells leaves areas of
the tubules with no barrier to prevent diffusion of
electrolytes and fluids (Figure 12.4). Thus, up to 50%
of glomerular filtrate can be lost to ‘back leak’, and
urea, creatinine, electrolytes, and fluids undergoing
glomerular filtration fail to be excreted.
For reasons that are not entirely clear, toxic and ischemic insults are often followed by a period of intrarenal vasoconstriction. This decreases the blood flow
delivered to the glomerulus, leading to a decrease in
GFR, and affects blood supply to the entire kidney.
The resulting hypoxia is most profound in the S3

25/04/16 11:09 pm

Nephrology/urology

451

Table 12.4 Mechanism for common causes of acute kidney injury.
Ethylene glycol

Used as an anti-freeze in cars (prohibited in some countries)
Toxic dose: 1.4 ml/kg in cats; 4.4 ml/kg in dogs
Ethylene glycol is broken down in the liver by a series of oxidative steps. Several of the ethylene
glycol metabolites are directly toxic to renal epithelial cells. One of the metabolites, oxalate, leads
to the formation of calcium oxalate crystals within the tubules

Leptospirosis

Zoonotic disease. Caused by a number of antigenically distinct serovars of the bacteria Leptospira
Maintained in the wild by asymptomatic wild animals (hosts), which shed the bacteria in urine.
Infection occurs when leptospires penetrate mucous membranes or broken skin. Renal tubular
epithelial cells become colonized resulting in interstitial lymphoplasmacytic inflammation

NSAIDs

Block the cyclo-oxygenase pathway preventing the formation of locally protective ­prostaglandins
in the kidney. Activation of the renin–angiotensin system leads to ­vasoconstriction in the
glomerular capillary bed. As the arterioles constrict, blood ­flow out of the glomerulus and into
peritubular capillaries decreases. If left unchecked, the resulting decreased blood flow to the
medulla of the kidney leads to ischemic injury. Suppression of the renin–angiotensin system by
IV fluid therapy can help prevent this vasoconstriction

Cholecalciferol-based
rodenticides

Cholecalciferol is metabolized to calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D. Calcitriol increases
­intestinal absorption, stimulates bone resorption, and encourages renal tubular reabsorption of
calcium. This can lead to soft tissue (e.g. kidney) mineralization

Lilium and Hemerocallis
(true lilies)

Lilies of the genera Lilium and Hemerocallis (e.g. Easter lilies, tiger lilies) are extraordinarily
­nephrotoxic; however, the mechanism of toxicity is not known. It is important to note that not all
‘lilies’ are members of this group. Peruvian and peace lilies are examples of plants that are not toxic

Grapes/raisins

The mechanism of toxicity is not known; however, it does not appear to be related to heavy
­metals, pesticides, or mycotoxins. Ingestion has been shown to cause acute tubular ­necrosis of the
­ roximal tubule
p

(straight) segment of the proximal convoluted tubule
(PCT) and the ascending loop of Henle, where metabolic activity is quite high and blood supply is limited.
This can lead to further permanent nephron loss.

Clinical presentation
General
Clinical signs of AKI are somewhat dependent on the
underlying cause, severity of the azotemia, and electrolyte imbalances. Clinical signs that are often noted include
depression, weakness, dehydration, anorexia, vomiting,
diarrhea, uremic breath, oral ulcers (Figures 12.5, 12.6),
and hypothermia.

Ethylene glycol specific
Ethylene glycol is an alcohol that does not become toxic
until metabolized by the liver. Early clinical signs are
due to the alcohol’s effect on the central nervous system
(CNS) and include ataxia, proprioceptive deficits, muscle
tremors, nausea, vomiting, and seizures. Polyuria and
polydipsia are common because ethylene glycol and its
metabolites have a diuretic effect. Since it is potentially

K22463_C012.indd 451

treatable in the early stages, ethylene glycol exposure
should be considered in every dog with acute unexplained neurologic signs.

Differential diagnosis
Prerenal azotemia, postrenal azotemia, CKD.

Diagnosis
Determining the likely underlying cause of the kidney
injury is critical in accessing prognosis as well as for developing an appropriate treatment plan. The importance of
the client interview cannot be overemphasized. Questions
should focus on possible exposure to environmental nephrotoxins (e.g. ethylene glycol, cholecalciferol-based rodenticides), household toxins (lilies, grape products), current
medications (both human and pet), and recent travel
history. Often, travel will expose a patient to diseases not
commonly encountered in the local environment.
Once the presence of azotemia (increased BUN,
creatinine, and phosphorus) is confirmed, possible
differential diagnoses (prerenal azotemia, postrenal azotemia, and CKD) must be eliminated from consideration.

25/04/16 11:09 pm

452

Diseases of specific organ systems

12.1

12.2

12.3

12.4

Figures 12.1–12.4 Hypothesized causes of oliguria in acute kidney injury. (12.1) Reduced glomerular permeability;
(12.2) vasoconstriction; (12.3) tubular obstruction; (12.4) back leak.

The hallmark of prerenal azotemia is a moderate elevation in BUN and creatinine with an increase in USG.
Postrenal azotemia should be suspected in animals with
elevations in BUN and creatinine that present with a distended bladder or free fluid in the abdomen. If this fluid is
from the urinary tract, it will have a BUN that is similar

K22463_C012.indd 452

to the patient’s serum but a creatinine concentration that
is higher. Once a diagnosis of AKI is suspected, a complete
blood count (CBC), serum chemistry, urinalysis, aerobic
urine culture, ultrasound, and serology testing should be
performed.

25/04/16 11:09 pm

Nephrology/urology

Urinalysis

453

Urinalysis can be used to quickly differentiate between
prerenal and renal azotemia. Isosthenuria is typical
of AKI while a USG of >1.025 in the dog and >1.035 in
the cat is typically associated with prerenal azotemia.
The presence of glucosuria in the absence of hyperglycemia is ­suggestive of acute proximal tubule dysfunction,
but is also seen with Fanconi syndrome. The discovery
of ­protein, in the absence of bacteria, red blood cells
(RBCs), white blood cells, or casts may be suggestive of
glomerular disease (see Protein-losing nephropathy).
Only a urine protein:creatinine (UPC) ratio can provide

a quantitative assessment of urine protein concentration
and should be performed on every proteinuric patient.
Microscopic examination of the urine sediment allows
detection of ­calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals, which
are associated with ethylene glycol ­toxicity (Figure 12.7).
The presence of casts can provide important d
­ iagnostic
­information (Figure 12.8). Bacteria may be seen in
cases of pyelonephritis; however, the absence of bacteria and/or inflammatory cells does not eliminate pyelonephritis as a cause of AKI. Casts, often observed in AKI,
can help determine the underlying cause (Figure 12.8;
Table 12.5).

12.5

12.7

12.6

Figure 12.7 Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals (arrow)
typical of those observed in the urine sediment of animals with
ethylene glycol intoxication. (Courtesy C.A. Osborne)
12.8

Figures 12.5, 12.6 Lingual necrosis in a dog with acute kidney
injury. (12.5) The necrotic tip of the tongue shows discoloration.
(12.6) Appearance of the tongue after the necrotic area has
sloughed. (Courtesy D.F. Senior)

K22463_C012.indd 453

Figure 12.8 Granular casts in the urine sediment of a dog with
acute kidney injury. (Courtesy D.F. Senior)

25/04/16 11:09 pm

454

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 12.5 Types of casts and associated conditions.
Hyaline casts

Proteinuria: glomerulonephritis and
amyloidosis

Granular casts

Degeneration of cells or precipitation of
proteins
Ischemic or toxic tubular injury

Fatty casts

Granular casts containing lipid
Nephrotic syndrome & diabetes

White cell
casts

Pyelonephritis

Waxy casts

Final degeneration of granular casts
Intrarenal stasis

Urine culture
Urine culture should be performed regardless of
the appearance of the urine sediment. Microscopic
­examination of urine sediment is not highly sensitive
for ­detection of bacteria. Kidneys may only shed a small
number of bacteria into the urine and these microorganisms can be missed when examining dilute urine. At one
time, the presence of white blood cells was used to gauge
the need for a urine culture; however, this too has proven
to be unreliable.

Complete blood count
Changes in the CBC are often non-specific. However,
­elevations in the white blood cell count can be associated
with pyelonephritis and systemic infectious diseases. The
absence of a stress leukogram (neutrophilia, lymphopenia, and eosinopenia) in a sick patient should raise the
suspicion that the patient could have hypoadrenocorticism (Addison’s disease), not AKI.

Serum chemistry
AKI is accompanied by an elevation in BUN and creatinine. Elevations in phosphate usually parallel or exceed
that of creatinine. Calcium is often mildly to moderately
elevated but dramatic decreases are associated with
ethylene glycol toxicity. Serum bicarbonate decreases
while potassium increases with the degree of renal dysfunction. Anion gap should always be calculated ([Na+ +
K+] – [Cl- + HCO3-]). Normal canine anion gaps range from
12 to 24 mEq/l, while normal feline values are 13–27 mEq/l.
Increases can be associated with ketones, lactate, or
­uremia; however, significant increases in an AKI patient
are suggestive of toxin ingestion. In veterinary medicine, the most common nephrotoxin is ethylene glycol,
although methanol, ethanol, and salicylic acid should be
considered.

K22463_C012.indd 454

Radiography and ultrasound
When available, ultrasound is the preferred imaging
modality (Figure 12.9). Ultrasound can provide information about the renal architecture and outflow tract, and
allows interrogation of the renal blood flow. In addition,
ultrasound can be used to obtain renal biopsies in a minimally invasive fashion. Patients with AKI usually present
with kidneys of normal to increased size while small, irregular shaped kidneys are suggestive of chronic disease.

Infectious disease serology
In areas where leptospirosis is endemic, titers for the
prevalent serovars should be submitted in all patients
where the cause of the AKI is not immediately identified.
Generally, a microscopic agglutination titer of >1:800
in the absence of recent vaccination suggests exposure,
while a four-fold increase in paired titers 14 days apart
indicates an active infection. There are PCR assays for leptospirosis. They may be positive in early infection before a
rise in specific antibody detected by MAT or ELISA is present. There are some questions as to the sensitivity and
­specificity of the test. Other serologic tests (e.g. leishmaniasis, rickettsia, babesiosis) should be ­considered based on
the location of the patient and the relevant travel history.

Ethylene glycol blood test
Any patient with a severe metabolic acidosis, increased
anion gap, calcium oxalate crystalluria, hypocalcemia,
or any combination of these signs should be tested for
ethylene glycol exposure. This should be done regardless of the compatibility of the history with exposure.
It is important to note that some of the commercially
available test kits may not be sensitive enough to detect
12.9

Figure 12.9 Ultrasound of a kidney from a dog with
ethylene glycol intoxication. Note the dramatically increased
echogenicity of the renal cortex consistent with, but not
diagnostic, for this toxin. (Courtesy L. Gaschen)

25/04/16 11:09 pm

Nephrology/urology

ethylene glycol exposure in cats, as the lethal serum concentration may be below the threshold of the test.

Management
Successful treatment of AKI is dependent on determining
an underlying cause, correcting dehydration, establishing a brisk diuresis, and correcting life-threatening electrolyte imbalances. Often, treatment must begin before
the cause can be established; however, the ­importance of
­accurate fluid therapy cannot be overemphasized. Studies
in ­people and animal models clearly demonstrate that
even small amounts of excessive fluid administration can
be fatal in AKI patients.
Due to inappetence, vomiting, and an impaired ability to concentrate urine, dehydration is common in AKI
patients. Initial fluid therapy must account for three factors: patient dehydration, maintenance fluids, and insensible losses. A balanced electrolyte solution can be used
(LRS, Normosol); however, if hyperkalemia exists, 0.9%
saline should be substituted.
First, the patient’s degree of dehydration must be estimated (Table 12.6) and then the total volume of fluids
needed to correct dehydration can be calculated using
the equation:
deficit in liters = % dehydration × kg body weight
So that fluids have time to equilibrate between the
vascular, interstitial, and cellular compartments,
­
this deficit must be divided and administered over
8–12 hours. Commonly available formulae for calculating
‘maintenance’ fluids assume normally functioning kidneys and are of little utility in formulating fluid therapy
Table 12.6 Signs used to determine degree of dehydration.
% dehydration

Clinical signs

<5%

Not detectable

5–6%

Subtle loss of skin elasticity

6–8%

Delay in return of skin to normal position
Slight increase in CRT
Dry mucous membranes

10–12%

Skin stands in place when tented
Increase in CRT
Eyes sunken
Dry mucous membranes
Shock: tachycardia, cold extremities,
weak pulses

12–15%

Death imminent

K22463_C012.indd 455

455

plans for AKI patients; rather, an indwelling urinary
catheter should be aseptically placed to measure urine
­output. Hourly urine output is then used as the surrogate
‘maintenance’ fluid rate. Finally, insensible losses can be
­estimated as 20 ml/kg/day plus any fluids lost to vomiting or diarrhea. For example:
A 10 kg dog presenting for AKI is found to be 10% dehydrated and is producing 5 ml/hour urine. Total dehydration is determined to be 1 liter (10 kg × 0.10), to be given
over 8–12 hours. Thus, the dehydration component of the
hourly fluid therapy is 83 ml/hour (1,000 ml/12 hours).
The patient is producing 5 ml/hour and this represents
the maintenance fluids. There has been no vomiting or
diarrhea reported so the insensible losses are 8 ml/hour
([20 ml/kg × 10]/24). Therefore, the hourly fluid rate for
the next 12 hours should be 96 ml/hour (83 ml/hour +
5 ml/hour + 8 ml/hour). Urine output per hour is monitored regularly and the maintenance fluid component of
the formula adjusted.
Once dehydration has been corrected, fluid therapy
should account only for maintenance fluids and insensible losses. To determine maintenance fluids, urine should
be collected and quantified at a regular interval (e.g. every
4 hours) and the hourly urine production rate can be used
as the ‘maintenance’ rate. Insensible losses can be estimated as 20 ml/kg/day plus any fluids lost to vomiting or
diarrhea. For example:
The 10 kg dog is now well hydrated. The patient is producing 9 ml/hour and this represents the maintenance
fluids. There has been no vomiting or diarrhea reported
so the insensible losses are 8 ml/hour (20 ml/kg × 10/24).
Therefore, the hourly fluid rate for the next 12 hours
should be 17 ml/hour (9 ml/hour + 8 ml/hour). Urine
­output is monitored regularly (e.g. every 4 hours) and the
maintenance component of the formula adjusted.
AKI patients are at high risk for fluid overload and
death; therefore, whenever possible, central venous pressure (CVP) should be monitored in addition to urine output (Figure 12.10). An increase in CVP of >5 cm H2O above
baseline, or an absolute value of >9 cm H2O, suggests an
excessive fluid administration rate. Although patient
weight can provide information on the patient’s hydration status, it is too insensitive an indicator to be useful
as the sole method of monitoring.
The goal should be a brisk diuresis of at least 1 ml/kg/
hour. Well-hydrated animals that produce <0.25 ml/kg/
hour of urine are considered to be in oliguric renal failure, while anuric renal failure patients fail to produce any
urine. These conditions necessitate aggressive treatment.
Occasionally, AKI patients will produce large volumes of
urine once dehydration is corrected. Polyuric patients

25/04/16 11:09 pm

456

Diseases of specific organ systems

12.10

Figure 12.10 Central venous pressure measurement in a dog.
(Courtesy K. Ryan)

are probably either less severely affected or represent a
later course of the disease process. Polyuric patients are
generally easier to manage clinically, as they are less
likely to develop life-threatening electrolyte abnormalities and fluid overload; however, they still require careful monitoring. Urine production needs to be quantitated
regularly and adjusted as previously described or dehydration can occur rapidly. Significant azotemia and uremia can persist during this polyuric phase and should not
be considered a negative prognostic indication.
In oliguric and anuric animals that are not fluid overloaded and are well hydrated, mannitol is considered to
be the initial treatment of choice. Experimental models
of renal failure have shown mannitol to increase renal
blood flow, shrink swollen tubular cells, dislodge tubular
obstructions, and scavenge free radicals. It is given as a
0.25–1.0 g/kg IV bolus over 30 minutes. If urine production improves, a CRI of 1–2 mg/kg/minute can be started.
Mannitol is contraindicated in patients with ethylene glycol intoxication because it can further ­exacerbate hyperosmolality, thus exacerbating the neurologic signs. If
there is no response to therapy or in an overhydrated animal, therapy with furosemide should be attempted.
Furosemide is a loop diuretic that as been associated with the induction of diuresis and resolution of
tubular obstructions under experimental conditions.
Furosemide is typically given as a bolus (2 mg/kg) and
if urine p
­ roduction increases, it is continued as a CRI

K22463_C012.indd 456

(0.25–1.0 mg/kg/hour). (Note: Aminoglycoside toxicity
should not be treated with furosemide as it can potentiate further renal injury.) Studies in people have failed
to demonstrate improved survival in AKI patients who
received furosemide or mannitol; however, widespread
access to advanced therapies such as dialysis makes it
unclear if these studies are directly applicable to animals. At one time, furosemide was given with dopamine
for alleged synergistic effects; however, the use of dopamine is not supported.
Small retrospective studies had suggested that fenoldopam, a peripheral dopamine D1 receptor ­agonist, and
diltiazem, a calcium channel blocker, might be helpful
in the treatment of AKI. More recent prospective s­ tudies
have failed to demonstrate a benefit of either drug. Some
research suggests that use of diltiazem may actually
be contraindicated depending on the inciting cause of
the AKI; therefore, use of these drugs cannot be recommended at this time.
Patients that produce significant amounts of urine in
response to rehydration or mannitol/furosemide therapy
are less likely to require specific treatment for electrolyte
and acid–base imbalances. Oliguric and anuric renal failure patients that do not respond to medical management
can quickly develop fatal hyperkalemia and metabolic
acidosis.

Hyperkalemia
The most common life-threatening electrolyte imbalance
encountered in AKI is hyperkalemia. Restoring urine
production is critical for long-term survival. Elevation
in serum potassium causes a reduction of the transmembrane electrochemical gradient and changes nerve and
muscle cell excitability. Clinically, signs of hyperkalemia
include muscle weakness, reduced cardiac contractility, arrhythmias, and neurologic abnormalities. Classic
ECG findings include bradycardia, disappearance of the
P wave, spiking of the T wave, and widened QRS complexes (Figure 12.11). These changes begin to appear
when potassium approaches 6.5 mEq/l. Cardiac arrest can
occur at any time.
In the absence of adequate urine production, only
­dialysis can provide a long-term solution to hyperkalemia; however, there are several strategies for short-term
management of this condition (Table 12.7).

Metabolic acidosis
Metabolic acidosis is also common in AKI, as the
renal tubules are responsible for recapturing ­
filtered
bicarbonate as well as manufacturing new buffer.
­
Generally, ­
metabolic acidosis is not treated unless

25/04/16 11:09 pm

Nephrology/urology

PAGE 1 : TIME 0: 00: 00
50 mm/sec: 1 cm/mV
II

12.11

II

Table 12.8 Protocols used to control emesis in acute kidney
injury patients.
Antiemetic
protocols

Ondansetron (Zofran): 5HT3 inhibitor
(0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV [slow push] q6–12h)

Table 12.7 Management of hyperkalemia.

serum bicarbonate is <12 mEq/l and pH <7.2. A dose
for ­
bicarbonate can be calculated as (body weight in
kg × 0.3) × (16 minus ­measured bicarbonate [mEq/l]).
Typically, only two-thirds of the dose is given, with onethird given IV over 30 minutes while another one-third
can be given with IV fluids over 4 hours. Acid–base status
should be re-evaluated before additional bicarbonate is
administered.

Emesis
Quite commonly, AKI patients experience ­significant
vomiting that can complicate treatment, worsen
­
electrolyte abnormalities, and contribute to dehydra­
tion. The vomiting is likely due to both stimulation of the
chemoreceptor trigger zone by uremic toxins and ­gastric
irritation. These should be addressed with a combination of antiemetic and gastric protectant medications
(Table 12.8). Until emesis is controlled, these medications
should only be given IV.

Drug dosage
Many drugs are excreted by the kidneys. In AKI, dosages
of these drugs must be adjusted to reflect the reduced
clearance. One method is to monitor serum drug levels
and adjust dosages accordingly. This is rarely performed
in veterinary or human medicine due to the cost and test
availability. A more commonly used method is to reduce
dosages by multiplying them by 1/serum creatinine.
This is based on the principle that increases in serum

K22463_C012.indd 457

Metoclopramide (Reglan): dopamine
inhibition (1.0–2.0 mg/kg IV or CRI q24h)
Maropitant citrate (Cerenia): NK1
­inhibition (1.0 mg/kg SC q24h [dogs];
0.5–1.0 mg/kg SC q24h [cats])

Figure 12.11 Example of an ECG of a patient with
hyperkalemia (lead II).

•• Calcium gluconate (10% solution): 0.5–1.0 ml/kg given IV
over 10–15 minutes. Protects against cardiac toxicity for
approximately 30 minutes
•• Regular insulin (0.1–0.25 units/kg) and glucose (1–2 g/
unit of insulin). Potassium transported into cells with
glucose. Provides short-term correction
•• Sodium bicarbonate (1–2 mEq/kg over 20 minutes).
Corrects for acidosis, allowing potassium back into cells.
Effects can last 1–2 hours

457

Dolasetron (Anzemet): 5HT3 inhibitor
(0.4–0.6 mg/kg IV q24h)
Gastric irritation

Omeprazole (Prilosec): proton pump
inhibitor (0.7–1.0 mg/kg PO q12–24h)
Sucralfate (Carafate): gastric coating
(0.5–1.0 mg/kg PO [dog]; 0.25 mg/kg
[cat])
Famotidine (Pepcid): H2 receptor
­antagonist (0.5 mg/kg PO, SQ, or IV q24h)

creatinine are inversely proportionate to the fall in GFR.
Thus, as serum creatinine increases, GFR and drug clearance decreases by a proportionate amount; however,
this approximation is valid only until serum creatinine
approaches 4 mg/dl (354 µmol/l). Many will reduce the
dosages based on serum creatinine until it rises above
4 mg/dl, and then use the calculation as a guide while
empirically adjusting the dosage. Unless serum levels
are being measured or GFR calculated, nephrotoxic drugs
and those drugs that are cleared by the kidney and have
a narrow therapeutic range must be avoided.

Leptospirosis
Patients should be treated as outlined above with ­special
attention paid to fluid therapy. Patients who are oliguric
or anuric benefit from advanced renal therapies such as
dialysis, and referral should be considered. Whenever
­possible, doxycycline should be used as the initial antimicrobial therapy as it both treats the leptospiremia and
clears the carrier state; however, doxycycline is metabolized by the liver and excreted in the bile. Supraphysiologic
serum concentrations can occur in patients with liver
impairment, which is common in leptospirosis patients.
In patients with evidence of liver involvement, antibiotics in the beta-lactam category (penicillin, ampicillin)
should be used for 2 weeks to clear the leptospiremia. This
is then followed with 2 weeks of doxycycline to clear the
carrier state.

25/04/16 11:09 pm

458

Diseases of specific organ systems

Specific toxin ingestion
Ethylene glycol
Exposure is always a medical emergency. Several ­cageside tests are now available for the detection of this toxin.
These tests differ in their sensitivity as well as the complexity of the testing procedure. In the absence of an
in-hospital diagnostic test, the treatment of ethylene glycol should begin whenever a combination of compatible
laboratory findings (severe metabolic acidosis, increased
anion gap, hypocalcemia, calcium oxalate crystalluria)
is seen in an animal demonstrating appropriate clinical
signs. If ingestion is discovered in the first hour, vomiting should be induced and activated charcoal administered. Initial serum chemistry should be obtained and
repeated at 24 and 48 hours. Methylpyrazole, an antidote,
should be administered at once (Table 12.9). The first
step in ethylene glycol’s metabolism into toxic intermediaries takes place in the liver by alcohol dehydrogenase.
Methylpyrazole binds to and inactivates alcohol dehydrogenase so that the ethylene glycol can leave the body
unchanged through the kidneys. Although e­ thanol can
be administered IV as an antidote, methylpyrazole is far
safer and more efficacious. IV fluids should be started
at a rate of 4 ml/kg/hour and urine output ­monitored for
at least 48 hours. If urine output decreases, follow AKI
fluid therapy ­recommendations outlined above.
In dogs, the greatest benefit of medical management
is seen in the first 5–8 hours and cats within 3 hours
of ingestion. In one study, those cats treated 3 hours or
less after exposure with 4-methylpyrazole (4-MP), had
100% survival while those treated with ethanol had 25%
­survival; however, 4 hours after ethylene glycol ingestion,
there was 100% mortality regardless of the treatment.
Table 12.9 Treatment of ethylene glycol toxicity.
Canine

4-MP (methylpyrazole 50 mg/ml): 20 mg/kg
IV first dose; 15 mg/kg at 12 hours; 15 mg/kg
at 24 hours; 5 mg/kg at 36 hours

Feline

4-MP (methylpyrazole 50 mg/ml): 126 mg/kg
slow IV initial dose; 31.25 mg/kg IV at
12 hours; 31.25 mg/kg IV at 24 hours;
31.25 mg/kg IV at 36 hours

Alternative
treatment

A 7% ethanol solution is made by removing
175 ml from a 1 L bag of saline and adding
175 ml of an 80 proof vodka, or by removing
74 ml from a 1 L bag of saline and adding 74 ml
of 190 proof alcohol. For both cats and dogs,
give a loading dose of 8.6 ml/kg 7% ethanol
(slow IV), then continue with a CRI of 1.43 ml/
kg/hour. Remember to use only ‘clear’ alcohols

K22463_C012.indd 458

It has been reported that cats treated with ­hemodialysis
after the onset of renal failure secondary to ethylene glycol had a significantly better survival rate. (Note: The
4-MP dose for cats is approximately six times the dose
used for dogs.)

NSAID toxicity
Because of its rapid absorption and depressive effect on
the CNS, vomiting should be induced only if ingestion is
immediately detected. Initial serum chemistry should be
obtained and repeated at 24 and 48 hours. IV fluids should
be started at a rate of 4 ml/kg/hour and urine output
monitored for at least 48 hours. If urine output decreases,
follow the AKI fluid therapy recommendations outlined
above. Misoprostol, a synthetic prostaglandin E1 analog,
can be given to dogs at a dose of 2.0–5.0 µg/kg q8h. Due to
its long half-life, naproxen toxicity should be treated for
at least 72 hours.

Cholecalciferol-based rodenticides
If ingestion is discovered in the first 24 hours, vomiting
should be induced and activated charcoal administered.
Because of enterohepatic recirculation, activated charcoal administration should be repeated. Initial serum
chemistry should be obtained and then repeated every
12 hours for 4 days. Intravenous fluids (0.9% sodium chloride) should be started at a rate of 4 ml/kg/hour and urine
output monitored for at least 48 hours. Sodium chloride is
preferred as it increases calcium excretion. If urine output decreases, the AKI fluid therapy recommendations
outlined above should be followed. A combination of furosemide (2 mg/kg q6h) and prednisone (2–3 mg/kg q12h)
should be administered to reduce calcium resorption
and increase its excretion. If oral intake is possible, oral
phosphate binders (e.g. aluminum hydroxide) can be used
as needed. If calcium and phosphorus levels remain elevated, a single dose of pamidronate 1.3–2.0 mg/kg given
IV over 2 hours may be effective. Often one dose is needed
for the entire treatment. Calcium and phosphorus levels
should be monitored for 6 weeks. Due to their ­prolonged
half-life, treatment of these toxicities can be prolonged
and expensive.

Grapes, raisins, lily ingestion
If ingestion is discovered in the first 4 hours, vomiting
should be induced and activated charcoal administered.
Initial serum chemistry should be obtained and then
repeated at 24 hours. IV fluids should be started at a
rate of 4 ml/kg/hour and urine output monitored for at
least 48 hours. If urine output decreases, the AKI fluid
therapy recommendations outlined above should be

25/04/16 11:09 pm

Nephrology/urology

followed. Prognosis for cats presenting for lily ingestion
is guarded. In one small study, 50% of cats that presented
for ingestion of lily plants died despite aggressive therapy. Dogs suffering AKI secondary to grape ingestion also
have a guarded prognosis. In one study, more than half
of affected patients survived; 65% of those that survived
had complete resolution of signs. Since grape toxicity
appears to be idiosyncratic, all exposures should be considered potentially lethal. It is important to realize that
raisin containing products such as breads, cakes, and
‘trail mix’ are also potentially toxic.

459

12.12

Advanced renal therapies
In recent years, the increasing availability of veterinary
dialysis centers has made this modality a viable option.
Indications for extracorporeal blood purification include
significant uremia, anuria, oliguria, hyperkalemia, and
exposure to dialyzable drugs/toxins. The removal of toxins by dialysis is dependent on several characteristics
of the drug (size, protein binding, volume of distribution, water solubility) as well as the dialysis equipment
available. Dialysis centers maintain lists of dialyzable
drugs. Many centers can also perform therapeutic plasma
exchange, which has the potential for removing some
toxins that cannot be dialyzed.
Until recently, veterinary patients requiring dialysis
universally received intermittent dialysis (Figure 12.12),
which is performed at set intervals, often several times a
week for 6–8 hours. Continuous renal replacement therapy (Figure 12.13) is a newer modality that differs from
intermittent dialysis in several aspects. The most obvious difference is that this modality is administered on
a slow, continuous basis rather than intermittently. It is
not clear which modality, if any, is associated with better
outcomes.
If an owner is interested in dialysis, a center should be
consulted as soon as possible. The chance of a successful
treatment increases with early intervention. In addition,
if there is any chance that a client may be interested in
dialysis, the jugular veins should not be disturbed. In
many patients, these are the only veins in which a dialysis catheter can be placed and even a single blood draw
can render a vein unusable. An up-to-date list of dialysis centers around the world can be found at http://www.
queenofthenephron.com

CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
Definition/overview
CKD is characterized by a progressive decrease in the
kidney’s ability to concentrate urine, excrete nitrogenous

K22463_C012.indd 459

Figure 12.12 Patient receiving intermittent hemodialysis.
12.13

Figure 12.13 Patient receiving continuous renal replacement
therapy.

waste, produce hormones, and maintain electrolyte balance. This deterioration in renal function is due to a gradual, irreversible loss of nephrons and is the most common
type of renal disease in companion animals. CKD is often
divided into two categories based on the underlying etiology: congenital and acquired.
In congenital renal disease, the animal is either born
with lesions present in the kidneys (e.g. aplasia) or born
with a condition that will lead to renal disease in the
future (e.g. polycystic kidney disease). While most cases
of congenital renal disease are thought to be inherited,
the mode of genetic transmission and pathogenesis is
often unknown. The patient’s condition usually becomes
apparent early in life, often in the first year, and is progressive (Table 12.10).
Acquired CKD is the result of an insult to the renal
parenchyma that causes nephron loss and precipitates a

25/04/16 11:09 pm

460

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 12.10 Congenital causes of chronic kidney disease in the
dog and cat.

as a compensatory mechanism eventually ­perpetuates
­additional renal damage.

Condition

Breed

Amyloidosis

Shar Pei, Beagle, Abyssinian,
Oriental Shorthair

Initial insult

Renal dysplasia

Shi Tzu, Lhasa Apso, Golden
Retriever, Soft-coated
Wheaten Terrier, others

Decreased glomeruli number

Glomerulopathy

Soft-coated Wheaten Terrier,
Cocker Spaniel

Fanconi syndrome

Basenji

Polycystic kidney disease

Cairn Terrier, Persian

Glomerulonephritis

Bernese Mountain Dog

12.14

Compensatory vasodilatation

Increased plasma flow

Increased capillary pressure

Increased unit GFR

Glomerular disruption
and protein loss

Increased waste clearance

Inflammation

Glomerular
scarring and
occlusion

Tubulointerstitial fibrosis

gradual decline in renal function. While in some cases it
is possible to determine and treat the underlying cause of
the renal disease (e.g. pyelonephritis), in most instances
the nature of the initial insult is never discovered.
Regardless of the etiology, most cases of CKD have a similar clinical presentation, course, and treatment.

Figure 12.14 Pathophysiology of chronic kidney disease.

12.15

Pathophysiology
Although the exact pathophysiology of CKD is not known,
it is now believed that an initial insult reduces the number of functioning nephrons (Figure 12.14). This could be a
sequela of AKI, a congenital defect, or the result of a chronic
disease process (e.g. hypertension). Remaining nephrons
compensate by dilation of the glomerular arterioles,
increased intraglomerular capillary pressure, increased
renal plasma flow, and increased single nephron GFR
in a phenomenon that has been called hyperfiltration.
Hyperfiltration increases the clearance of nitrogenous
wastes in each surviving nephron, but elevated intraglomerular capillary pressure eventually leads to mechanical disruption of the capillaries and protein loss through
the glomerulus. Excess filtered protein is reabsorbed by
the epithelial cells of the PCT, broken down by cellular
lysosomal mechanisms and re-enters the blood as amino
acids. The process of breaking down proteins releases oxygen free radicals, which stimulate the release of inflammatory cytokines. The resulting inflammation damages
epithelial cells. Increased intraglomerular capillary
pressure also results in scarring and eventual occlusion
of the glomerular capillaries. Continued damage to tubular epithelial cells, combined with glomerular capillary
injury, leads to tubulointerstitial fibrosis, which is the
hallmark of CKD (Figures 12.15, 12.16). Thus, what starts

K22463_C012.indd 460

12.16

Figures 12.15, 12.16 Histopathology of the kidney from a dog
with chronic kidney disease. (12.15) Glomerulosclerosis and a
mononuclear interstitial infiltrate. (12.16) Tubular atrophy and
interstitial fibrosis. (Courtesy D.F. Senior)

25/04/16 11:09 pm

Nephrology/urology

461

Differential diagnosis

Urinalysis

Prerenal, primary renal, or postrenal azotemia, AKI.

The most common urinalysis finding in CKD is isosthenuria (SG = 1.007–1.015); however, some cats may still
be able to concentrate urine in the early phases of CKD.
Mild azotemia in the presence of highly concentrated
urine is the hallmark of prerenal azotemia. The finding of large amounts of glucose is suggestive of proximal tubular dysfunction and can be seen in dogs with
Fanconi syndrome (Figure 12.17). The detection of large
amounts of protein, in the absence of hematuria, bacteria, or white blood cells in the urine sediment, may be the
result of glomerular damage. A quantitative assessment
of urine protein concentration requires that a UPC ratio
be performed (see Glomerular disease). In cats, the UPC
ratio may be prognostic even in the absence of overt proteinuria. Research suggests that cats with CKD and a UPC
ratio of <0.43 lived approximately 2 years from the time
of diagnosis. Those with a UPC ratio of >0.43 lived only
about 9 months. Even if no bacteria are microscopically
detected in the urine, an aerobic urine culture should
always be performed to help rule out chronic pyelonephritis as a contributing factor to the progression of CKD.

Clinical presentation
Common clinical features of CKD include polyuria/­
polydipsia, weight loss, lethargy, anorexia, vomiting,
dehydration, oral ulcers, and uremic breath. In cats,
blindness secondary to hypertension is not uncommon
and is often the primary reason that owners seek veterinary care.

Diagnosis
The diagnosis of CKD is made on the basis of history,
physical examination, and laboratory blood work. Once
the presence of azotemia is confirmed, possible differential diagnoses (prerenal azotemia, postrenal azotemia, and AKI) must be eliminated from consideration.
A CBC, serum chemistry, urine analysis, aerobic urine
culture, and ultrasound should be performed on all CKD
patients.

Serum chemistry
CKD is accompanied by an elevation in BUN and creatinine; however, as advanced CKD patients are often
severely muscle wasted, creatinine may not be as elevated as one would expect. Elevations in serum phosphate often exceed those of serum creatinine. Calcium is
often mildly to moderately elevated as a result of secondary hyperparathyroidism. Serum bicarbonate decreases
with the degree of renal dysfunction and significant
decreases may be associated with a worse long-term
prognosis. Potassium levels are usually maintained in
the normal range, but hypokalemia can be observed in
cats. Recently, a new blood test, symmetric dimethylarginine (SDMA), has become available. Preliminary studies
have shown that SDMA is an accurate predictor of CKD
and may become elevated 9 months before creatinine in
dogs and 17 months earlier in cats. At the time of writing,
the best way to utilize this information in developing a
treatment regimen is not known.

Complete blood count
A normochromic, normocytic, nonregenerative anemia is
the most common hematologic finding in patients with
CKD. Elevations in the white blood cell count can be associated with chronic pyelonephritis or a systemic infectious disease; however, the white blood cell counts are
usually unremarkable.

K22463_C012.indd 461

Blood pressure measurement
Arterial hypertension is a common complication of CKD
that eventually affects the majority of cats and dogs. Not
only can hypertension have negative consequences for
the eyes, heart, and nervous system, it can also potentiate further kidney damage; therefore, identifying and
treating these patients is essential. Since hypertension
may develop at any point in the disease process, all
CKD patients should have their blood pressure checked
Fanconi facts

• Failure of proximal tubule transport 12.17
• Sodium, bicarbonate, potassium, glucose,
amino acids not resorbed
• 10–16% of Basenjis affected, documented
in other breeds

Diagnosis

• Signs of CKD and glucosuria with normal
blood glucose are suggestive
• Aminoaciduria is diagnostic

Treatment

• Oral supplementation: bicarbonate goal
(serum >12 mmol/l [12 mEq/l]); potassium
goal (serum 4–6 mmol/l [4–6 mEq/l]);
calcium goal (serum 2.25–2.5 mmol/l
[9–10 mg/dl])
• Renal failure diet

Prognosis

• Good with proper treatment

Figure 12.17 Fanconi syndrome characteristics.

25/04/16 11:09 pm

462

Diseases of specific organ systems

regularly. Specific guidelines for measuring and treating
arterial hypertension can be found later in this chapter
(see Hypertension).

Radiography and ultrasound
When available, ultrasound is the preferred imaging
modality. Not only does it provide an unparalleled view of
the renal architecture and outflow tract, but it can also be
utilized to obtain renal biopsies when indicated. Typically,
CKD is characterized as bilateral loss of renal mass; however, certain disease processes, such as polycystic kidney
disease, have a characteristic ultrasound appearance.
Enlarged kidneys are suggestive of an underlying disease process with secondary renal involvement (e.g.
lymphoma, feline infectious peritonitis [FIP], hydronephrosis), primary renal neoplasia, or AKI. Mild dilatation
of the renal pelvis (pyelectasia) is often seen with chronic
renal infections. Congenital renal dysplasia and aplasia
are characterized by an abnormal renal architecture with
loss of the delineation between the cortex and medulla.

Management
Staging
Patients with CKD should be staged according to the
guidelines developed by the International Renal Interest
Society (IRIS). These guidelines, which have been accepted
by the both the American and European Societies of
Veterinary Nephrology and Urology, classify patients on
the basis of renal function, proteinuria, and blood pressure
(Tables 12.11–12.13). For example, using these criteria, a
15-year-old cat with a creatinine of 3.0 mg/dl (265 µmol/l),
a UPC of 2.0, and a blood pressure of 170 mmHg would be
classified as a stage 3 proteinuric, stage II hypertensive
patient. Using this staging system not only allows for
a common nomenclature for describing and discussing
patients, but allows for the development and application
of appropriate guidelines for the prognosis and treatment
of CKD.

Fluid therapy
Many patients with CKD present with some degree of
dehydration. This can complicate management of CKD as
dehydration leads to hypoperfusion and prerenal azotemia. Proper rehydration often causes significant reductions in azotemia. Therefore, the degree of dehydration
should be estimated and, if significant, a regimen of
replacement fluids should be calculated and administered IV over 12–24 hours. In mildly dehydrated patients,
SC fluids can be administered during the clinic visit. In
either case, when patients have difficulty maintaining
proper hydration, the daily administration of SC fluids

K22463_C012.indd 462

Table 12.11 IRIS stages of CKD based on serum creatinine
values (mg/dl [µmol/l]).
Dog

Cat

Stage 1

<1.4 [<125]

<1.6 [<140]

Stage 2

1.4–2.0 [125–179]

1.6–2.8 [140–249]

Stage 3

2.1–5.0 [180–439]

2.9–5.0 [250–439]

Stage 4

>5.0 [>440]

>5.0 [>440]

Table 12.12 IRIS classification of proteinuria based on the
urine protein:creatinine ratio.
Dog

Cat

Proteinuric

>0.5

>0.4

Borderline proteinuric

0.2–0.5

0.2–0.4

Nonproteinuric

<0.2

<0.2

Table 12.13 IRIS classification of arterial hypertension.
Systolic blood pressure
Stage 0

<150 mmHg

Stage I

150–159 mmHg

Stage II

160–179 mmHg

Stage III

>180 mmHg

at home can help prevent dehydration, reduce azotemia,
and significantly improve the patient’s quality of life
(Figures 12.18a, b). In cases where the patient is uncooperative or the owner is unwilling to give SC fluids, a SC
fluid port (GIF-Tube®) can be inserted (Figures 12.19a, b).
This port provides easy access for fluid administration
and avoids the need for needles; however, some cats will
not tolerate these tubes. Alternatively, an esophagostomy
tube can be placed (Figures 12.20a–h). These are easily
inserted, can remain in position for extended periods of
time, and can be used to provide the patient’s fluid and
nutritional needs.

Control of acidosis
One of the primary functions of the kidney is to maintain
acid–base balance. The renal tubules reabsorb filtered
bicarbonate, generate new bicarbonate, and excrete
acids. As CKD progresses, the ability of the kidneys to
perform this function fails. Even when mild, chronic

25/04/16 11:09 pm

Nephrology/urology

463

12.18

a

b

Figures 12.18a, b Cat with chronic kidney disease receiving subcutaneous fluids.

12.19

a

b
Figures 12.19a, b Gif-Tube (a) and a patient with a Gif-Tube
inserted (b). (Courtesy Practivet)

sodium bicarbonate at a dose of 5–10 mg/kg q8–12h or
potassium citrate at 40–60 mg/kg q8–12h can be given.
The exact dose, which initially requires ­frequent monitoring, needs to be tailored to the individual patient.

Potassium
Hypokalemia is a common finding in cats with CKD and is
associated with muscle weakness, muscle mass loss, ileus,
and potentially fatal cardiac arrhythmias; however, the
most commonly observed manifestation is anorexia. This
condition is not recognized in dogs. The mechanism by
which cats develop hypokalemia is unknown; however,
it is generally believed to be a combination of malnutrition and excessive renal losses. In one study, one-third
of healthy cats fed a potassium restricted diet developed
interstitial nephritis and fibrosis. This suggests that low
potassium is not only an effect of renal failure but can
contribute to its progression. For this reason, most feline
renal failure diets are potassium supplemented and, in
most cases, will prevent hypokalemia. In patients that do
not respond to diet therapy, oral supplementation with
potassium citrate (20–30 mg/kg PO q24h) or potassium
gluconate (2–6 mEq/cat q24h) can be given.

Hyperphosphatemia
acidosis enhances protein catabolism, promotes bone
demineralization, and contributes to the array of clinical
signs experienced by the renal failure patient. Because
most feline maintenance diets are acidified, changing
the patient to an appropriately buffered renal failure
diet helps prevent and correct metabolic acidosis. When
the patient is being fed an appropriate diet, additional
oral alkalization therapy is only indicated when total CO2
is <18 mEq/l or serum bicarbonate is <17 mEq/l. Initially,

K22463_C012.indd 463

Because of its role in muscle and nerve conduction, calcium is highly regulated within the body. Parathyroid
hormone (PTH) is released by the parathyroid gland
in response to small decreases in circulating calcium
(Figure 12.21). PTH causes the release of stored calcium
and stimulates an enzyme in the renal tissue, alpha-1
hydroxylase, to convert calcidiol to calcitriol. Calcitriol,
the active form of vitamin D, stimulates absorption of
calcium from the intestinal tract and also provides the

25/04/16 11:09 pm

464

Diseases of specific organ systems

12.20

a

b

c

d

e

f

K22463_C012.indd 464

25/04/16 11:09 pm

Nephrology/urology

g

465

h

Figures 12.20a–h Esophagostomy tube placement. The patient is anesthetized and monitored. Although most tubes are placed
on the left lateral cervical area, the right can be used as well. A red rubber or silicone tube is selected and marked so that the end
of the tube will be located in the esophagus between the 6th and 9th intercostal spaces. The left lateral cervical area is clipped and
scrubbed. The jugular vein is identified and isolated. (a) A pair of Mixter hemostats (tip forms a right angle) is inserted into the
mouth and a small stab incision is made through the skin just over the tip of the hemostat. (b) The hemostat is seen poking through
the skin. (c) A feeding tube is inserted into the open jaws of the hemostat. (d) The feeding tube is pulled into the esophagus and
out of the mouth. (e, f) The tube is fed back into the mouth and down the esophagus. (g) A purse-string suture and a finger trap are
placed to hold the tube in place. (h) Radiography confirms correct placement. Note the end of the tube is caudal to the heart and
cranial to the lower esophageal sphincter (arrow).
12.21
↓Renal mass
↓Tubular H+
secretion

↓

↓1.25(OH)2D3

PO 43-

↓GFR

↓

↓
α-Hydroxylase

H+
retention

Hypocalcemia
↓Intest. Ca 2+
absorbtion

↓

Bone
buffering
PTH

↓

Bone
demineralization
Figure 12.21 Pathogenesis of renal secondary
hyperparathyroidism in chronic kidney disease. Renal
production of calcitriol normally inhibits parathyroid hormone
production and release by the parathyroid gland. Broken arrows
indicate an inhibitory action.

K22463_C012.indd 465

negative feedback for PTH release. Phosphate is normally
absorbed from the diet, used for metabolic processes, and
subsequently undergoes renal excretion. As renal mass
decreases and GFR falls, excessive levels of phosphate
accumulate in the blood. Phosphate acts to inhibit alpha-1
hydroxylase, thus preventing the formation of calcitriol
and removing the negative feedback on PTH release. Thus,
hyperphosphatemia leads to loss of calcitriol, unabated
PTH release from the parathyroid, and release of calcium
and phosphorus from bone. Soft tissue mineralization
becomes a concern when the product of serum calcium
(mg/dl) and phosphorus (mg/dl) approaches 70. This is
often seen in advanced CKD patients. In addition to its
role in calcium regulation, calcitriol may also play a role
in slowing the progression of renal disease. Therefore,
controlling hyperphosphatemia is essential.
Other than hemodialysis there is no treatment that will
rapidly decrease serum phosphorus levels, although fluid
therapy can help in dehydrated patients. Since the primary source of serum phosphorus is dietary, the first step
is to change the patient’s diet to a low phosphorus diet.
In many cases, this will adequately control serum phosphorus levels. If after 2–3 weeks, hyperphosphatemia has
not resolved, a phosphate-binding agent should be added
to the diet. Aluminum hydroxide and aluminum carbonate (30–80 mg/kg q24h divided and given with meals) are
commonly used and are effective in binding phosphorus

25/04/16 11:09 pm

Diseases of specific organ systems

administration of an angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor (ACEI). The goal of the therapy is to reduce the
UPC ratio by at least 50%, and preferably into the normal
range. Although enalapril can be used, it is cleared exclusively through the kidney, while benazepril (0.25–0.5 mg/
kg PO q12–24h), which has renal and hepatic clearance,
is preferred. In some patients, ACEIs have been associated with a worsening of azotemia; therefore, renal values should be checked 7–14 days after starting therapy. If
significant reductions in proteinuria cannot be achieved
with an ACEI alone, angiotensin receptor ­blockers can be
added. Pharmacologic data are sparse; however, irbesartan (1–5 mg/kg PO q24) has been s­ uggested. Additional
information can be found later this chapter (Proteinlosing nephropathy).

Treatment of anemia
The cause of anemia in CKD is multifactorial and includes
decreased RBC life span due to uremic toxins, nutritional
deficiencies impairing RBC production, and intestinal
bleeding; however, the most important cause of anemia
is the loss of erythropoietin production by renal interstitial cells (Figure 12.22). Erythropoietin is a glycoprotein
that increases the number of committed stem cells in the
bone marrow that will develop into erythrocytes. In the
absence of erythropoietin, erythroid stem cells undergo
apoptosis (programed cell death). Release of erythropoietin depends on oxygen sensors located on renal interstitial cell membranes. These sensors upregulate production
of erythropoietin during hypoxia and downregulate production when blood oxygen levels are normal.
Hyperphosphatemia

GI blood
loss

O2 delivery
to tissues

Direct toxin
inihibition

Platelet
defect

Proteinuria can accelerate the progression of CKD and
steps to mitigate protein loss should be taken when
the UPC ratio exceeds 0.4 in the cat and 0.5 in the dog.
Therapy usually involves feeding a renal failure diet and

K22463_C012.indd 466

RBC
fragility

↓Erythropoietin
↓ RBC
life span

Reduced erythropoietin

Proteinuria

12.22
Hyper
PTH

Reduced
RBC
glutathione

↓2,3-DPG

↓

in the intestine. Cats may find ­aluminum-based liquid
phosphate binders to be unpalatable. Lanthanum carbonate (Fosrenol®) (30 mg/kg divided and given with
meals) is an excellent alternative. It should be crushed
and mixed well with food. Recently, a veterinary specific lanthanum-based phosphate binding product has
been introduced (Renalzin®). Although it is both palatable and effective, it is not available in all countries.
Calcium acetate (60–90 mg/kg q24h divided with meals)
may also be effective in binding phosphate but increases
calcium absorption in the intestine and may contribute
to hypercalcemia; therefore, monitoring of serum calcium is essential. Regardless of the binder selected, the
medication should be started at the lowest dose and then
adjusted as needed based on serum phosphorus levels.
Two weeks should be given between rechecks. Recently,
several new phosphate binders have been introduced for
use by human renal disease patients. These drugs were
produced in response to concerns that small amounts of
aluminum absorbed over long periods of time could lead
to health problems. These new drugs are expensive and
have not been shown to be more effective or safer in cats
and dogs.
Since elevated PTH levels result from inhibition of calcitriol synthesis, supplementation with exogenous calcitriol has been proposed as a treatment for secondary
hyperparathyroidism. Also, studies suggest that calcitriol
therapy slows progression of CKD and improves survival
in CKD dogs; however, similar results have not been documented in cats. Therefore, dogs with CKD should receive
calcitriol therapy. Prior to calcitriol use, calcium and
phosphate serum levels should be within normal range.
Calcitriol (2.0–2.5 ng/kg/day) has been effective in normalizing serum PTH levels; however, required dosages
vary widely and must be tailored to each patient. Ionized
calcium and PTH must be monitored. The goal is to minimize PTH without inducing hypercalcemia. Since calcitriol can significantly increase intestinal calcium and
phosphorus absorption, it must not be given with food.
Use of calcium containing phosphate binders should be
avoided. The primary complication associated with calcitriol treatment is hypercalcemia, which can occur at
any time. Therefore, it is recommended that calcium and
phosphate levels be monitored 1 week after starting therapy and then once monthly.

↓

466

Reduced PCV
Figure 12.22 Pathogenesis of anemia in chronic kidney
disease. The major cause of anemia is reduced
renal production of erythropoietin.

25/04/16 11:09 pm

Nephrology/urology

Patients who are symptomatic for their anemia or have
a dangerously low packed cell volume (PCV <20%) should
immediately receive a compatible transfusion. Patients
with a low PCV that are not symptomatic or critical should
be started on a recombinant erythropoietin replacement
therapy. Two alternatives exist: epoetin alfa (Epogen®)
and darbepoetin alfa (Aranesp®). Epoetin alfa is more
widely used because it is less expensive and there is
more veterinary experience with this drug. Because it is
a human recombinant protein, epoetin alfa can stimulate an immune response that can inactivate endogenous
erythropoietin as well as the exogenous hormone. Some
patients may become transfusion dependent. For this
reason, it should be reserved for patients with significant
anemia. The induction dose is 44–120 units/kg SC three
times a week. Response time is variable but increases in
PCV are usually seen in 1–2 weeks and ­target PCV should
be obtained within a month. Once PCV has returned to
24–28%, the dose is tapered down to the ­minimum needed
to maintain efficacy. Often, 44–88 units/kg SC 1–2 times
a week is sufficient. The PCV should be rechecked every
2 weeks during induction and then monthly. Failure of
the PCV to rise despite increasing dosages of epoetin
alfa is strongly suggestive of an immune response. The
drug should be discontinued at once and its use can be
re-attempted in 3–4 weeks. As the immune response is
likely to persist, these patients may never again respond
­appropriately to therapy. In addition, once an immune
response develops to epoetin alfa, ­darbepoetin alfa is
unlikely to be effective. Use of epoetin alfa has also been
associated with hypertension and, therefore, blood pressure should be checked regularly.
Darbepoetin alfa is newer and more costly, but experience suggests that it is much less likely to stimulate
an immune response. The induction dose is 1.5 units/kg
SC once a week. This is continued until the patient’s PCV
reaches the low end of the normal range. At this point, the
patient is changed to every other week dosing. Initially,
PCV should be checked weekly to avoid overdosing.
Eventually, the PCV can be checked monthly. Due to the
high demand for iron needed for erythropoiesis, it is recommended that patients receiving either epoetin alfa or
darbepoetin alfa receive iron supplementation (10 mg/kg
IM every 3–4 weeks).

Diet
The mainstay of CKD treatment has been the correction
of dehydration and nutritional support. Dietary formulations for patients with CKD have traditionally focused
on protein restriction in the hope of slowing the progression of renal failure. While protein restriction does help

K22463_C012.indd 467

467

reduce uremia and can significantly improve the patient’s
quality of life, it is not clear that controlling dietary protein alone can significantly change the disease course.
Nevertheless, it is clear that patients with CKD who are
fed a renal failure diet live longer than those fed a maintenance formulation. Certainly, control of acidosis, hyperphosphotemia, and hypokalemia are helpful in treating
these patients. Studies demonstrate that proper regulation of serum phosphorus alone can improve survival of
patients with CKD. However, it is now believed that the
ratio of omega-3 to omega-6 fatty acids may also play an
important role in slowing the progression of renal disease. All major commercially available renal failure diets
are generously supplemented with omega-3 fatty acids.

Anorexia
Patients with CKD often suffer from anorexia. While the
exact cause of inappetence is unknown, it is probably
related to uremic toxins combined with irritation of the
gastrointestinal tract. Due to their low protein, restricted
phosphorus, and reduced sodium, renal failure diets can
be unpalatable to even healthy pets. Owners should try
several different brands and formulations in order to find
one that their pet will eat. Some owners report good success with rotating several different diets. Many CKD pets
will eat frequent small meals rather than one or two large
ones; therefore, feeding schedules and amounts may need
to be adjusted. Warming of wet food can make a renal diet
more palatable, especially to cats; however, when utilizing a microwave oven, care must be taken as nonuniform
heating can lead to oral burns. Mirtazapine, a tetracyclic
antidepressant, may help improve appetite in anorexic
cats (1–3 mg/cat PO q72h). Because hypergastrinemia can
occur with CKD, many patients respond to H2-histamine
receptor blockers such as famotidine (0.5 mg/kg IV or PO
q24h). When present, nausea can usually be relieved with
either dopamine or serotonin (5HT) inhibitors (Table 12.8).

Advanced renal therapies.
Renal transplantation for cats with CKD is now being performed at referral centers around the world. In order to
be a candidate, a patient must be documented to be free
of infectious diseases such as feline leukemia virus, feline
immunodeficiency virus, and toxoplasmosis. Recent
thoracic radiographs and an abdominal ultrasound are
required to show the absence of a malignancy. In addition, an echocardiogram may be required to demonstrate
that the patient does not have significant cardiac disease. A good candidate would be a middle aged cat that is
suffering from increasing azotemia despite appropriate
therapy and yet is still in good body condition. Six-month

25/04/16 11:09 pm

468

Diseases of specific organ systems

survival approaches 60% while 3-year survival is >40%.
While renal transplantation has been performed in
dogs, the success rates have not been encouraging due
to problems with tissue rejection. Centers performing
renal transplantation can be found on line at: www.
queenofthenephron.com
Hemodialysis for the CKD patient is available at select
centers. While technically feasible, cost and the need for
treatments several times a week have made this option
impractical for most pet owners.

Ultrafiltrate
Epithelial cells

Nephrin
Basement membrane
Endotheial cells
Blood

Figure 12.23 The components of the glomerular membrane.

PROTEIN-LOSING NEPHROPATHY

1.0

Definition/overview

0.9

Normally, the glomerulus provides an effective barrier
against the loss of albumin and other large proteins into
the urine. In protein-losing nephropathy (PLN), the barrier is disrupted and excessive amounts of protein cross
the glomerular filtration barrier into the tubules. As a
result, tubules become damaged by inflammation and
fibrosis. Thus, what starts as a localized disruption of the
glomerulus leads to a generalized disease of the nephron.

0.8

Pathophysiology
The glomerular capillary bed is unique in that it can filter molecules based on the size and charge of a molecule.
The wall of the glomerular capillary is composed of three
distinct layers: endothelial cells, glomerular basement
membrane, and epithelial cells (Figure 12.23). The endothelial cells form the inner lining of the capillary tube.
While the endothelial cells do not provide a significant
filtration barrier, they do serve other important functions such as inhibition of clot formation. The basement
membrane, which provides the structural scaffold of the
glomerulus, possesses a negative change that helps establish glomerular charge selectivity. It is composed of type
IV collagen, laminin, and heparan sulfate. Collagen is
primarily responsible for the structural support, laminin
is involved with cell adhesion, and heparan sulfate provides the basement membrane with its negative charge.
Epithelial cells, called podocytes, freely float in Bowman’s
space. These cells give rise to an array of parallel projections called foot processes, which are attached to the basement membrane. The projections interdigitate to form
slit pores. Proteins, such as nephrin, bridge slit pores and
limit the size of molecules that can pass through.
The degree to which a protein can pass across the glomerular capillary wall is a function of molecular size and
charge (Figure 12.24). Size selectivity is based primarily
on podocyte slit pores while charge selectivity is a function of the negative charge generated by all three layers.

K22463_C012.indd 468

12.23

12.24

Fractional clearance

0.7
0.6
0.5

Cationic

0.4

Neutral

0.3

Anionic

0.2
0.1
0

4.0

6.0

8.0

Effective molecular diameter (nm)

Figure 12.24 Charge selectivity of glomerulus demonstrated
by fractional clearance of anionic and neutral molecules.
The neutral molecule is more freely filtered because it is not
repelled by the membrane’s charge.

Typically, small negatively charged proteins, such as
inulin (5,200 MW) are freely filtered, larger ones such as
myoglobin (17,000 MW) are partially filtered, and albumin (69,000 MW) is only slightly filtered. Under normal
circumstances, all filtered proteins are reabsorbed in
the PCT. Large proteins are taken into the tubular epithelial cells by carrier-mediated endocytosis and then
catabolized in the lysosomes where they are broken
down into amino acids. The process of breaking down
large amounts of proteins into amino acids is thought
to release oxygen free radicals and leads to the release
of inflammatory cytokines. The resulting inflammation
causes fibrosis and scarring of the tubules.
There are two disease processes associated with disruption of the normal filtration barrier of the glomerulus
and the development of PLN: amyloidosis and glomerulonephritis (GN). These cannot be distinguished from each

25/04/16 11:09 pm

Nephrology/urology

other on the basis of clinical signs or laboratory data.
Only a renal biopsy can be used to differentiate the two
conditions.

Amyloidosis
Amyloidosis is caused by an inappropriate deposition of
fibrils into the glomerulus. These fibrils are formed by the
polymerization of protein subunits, which have a specific
tertiary structure called the beta-pleated sheet. These
subunits, such as serum amyloid A (SAA), are produced
in the liver and are one of a number of acute-phase reactants manufactured in response to inflammation. The
exact function of these proteins is unknown, but production appears to be simulated by interleukin (IL)-2, IL-6,
and tumor necrosis factor, which are released by macrophages in response to tissue injury. Once polymerized,
the amyloid fibrils cannot be degraded because the betapleated sheet conformation prevents enzymatic degradation. When deposited in the glomerulus, the fibrils act to
disrupt normal function.

Glomerulonephritis
GN results from the deposition of preformed circulating
immune complexes or in-situ reaction of circulating antibodies with exogenous or endogenous antigens on the glomerular basement membrane. The presence of immune
complexes leads to activation of complement, neutrophil
chemotaxis, platelet aggregation, and activation of the
coagulation system. This leads to protein spilling across
the glomerulus and into the proximal tubules. Eventually,
the glomerulus responds to the immune response with
cellular proliferation, thickening of the basement membrane, and eventually sclerosis.
GN can be divided into three categories based on histologic appearance: membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN), membranous nephropathy (MN), and
proliferative glomerulonephritis.

●● Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN)
is the most common type of GN seen in the dog and
accounts for up to 60% of all cases. While a familial form
of the disease is seen with Bernese Mountain Dogs and
a rapidly progressive form has been associated with
Borrelia burgdorferi infection, the underlying cause of
many cases is unknown. The classic histopathologic
appearance is that of thickened capillary loops and
mesangial hypercellularity (Figures 12.25–12.28).
●● Membranous nephropathy (MN) is the second most
common type of GN lesions seen in the dog and the
most common type in the cat (GN2). In this condition, the glomerular basement membrane becomes

K22463_C012.indd 469

469

thickened due to the deposition of immune com­
plexes in the subepithelial spaces and the resulting proliferation of the basement membrane
(Figures 12.29–12.32).
●● Proliferative glomerulonephritis accounts for as little
as 2% of GN cases and is characterized by endocapillary or mesangial proliferation.

Clinical presentation
Generally, PLN is a disease of middle aged to older dogs.
Clinical features of PLN are somewhat dependent on the
underlying cause and degree of azotemia. Some cases are
detected on routine urine analysis in otherwise healthy
patients. Lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, and weight loss
are among the most common clinical signs in patients
with overt renal disease. Less commonly noted are polyuria, polydipsia, and ataxia.

Diagnosis
Urinalysis
The hallmark of PLN is the finding of inappropriate
amounts of urine protein in the absence of bacteria,
casts, or blood cells. It is impossible to determine the significance of proteinuria detected on routine urinalysis
or a urine dipstick; therefore, the finding of proteinuria
always warrants further investigation.
Normal renal protein excretion in dogs and cats is
<20 mg/kg/day. A 24-hour urine collection is the gold standard for quantifying the magnitude of protein excretion;
however, this is neither convenient nor practical in the
clinical setting. Because the UPC ratio has been shown to
closely correlate with 24-hour protein excretion, this value
is most commonly used in clinical applications. Healthy
dogs and cats have been shown to have a UPC ratio of
<0.5 and <0.4, respectively. It is important to note that the
presence of white blood cells, bacteria, epithelial cells, and
casts can significantly increase the UPC ratio. Therefore,
UPC ratio should only be performed in tandem with a full
urinalysis and sediment examination. In addition, studies
suggest that the UPC ratio can have significant day-to-day
variability associated with actual protein loss fluctuations. One strategy to minimize this variability is to have
the owner collect three samples of urine at home and store
them at 40°F (4.4°C). In the clinic, equal volumes of these
samples are pooled and submitted for analysis.

Serum chemistry
Kidney injury is usually accompanied by elevations in BUN,
creatinine, and phosphorus and a decrease in bicarbonate.
Proteinuria may be detected prior to onset of azotemia;
however, in most cases, serum albumin will be decreased.

25/04/16 11:09 pm

470

Diseases of specific organ systems

12.25

12.26

12.27

12.28

Figures 12.25–12.28 Illustrations of the histologic and ultrastructural features of membranoproliferative gomerulonephritis in
a dog. The light microscopic appearance of a single glomerulus is shown stained with with H&E (12.25), PAS (12.26), and Masson’s
trichrome (12.27). The transmission electron micrograph (12.28) shows subendothelial electron-dense immune deposits in the
capillary wall. (Courtesy R.P. Groman, G.E. Lees, B.R. Berridge, and F.J. Clubb Jr.)

Complete blood count
Anemia is by far the most common CBC finding in PLN
patients. The cause of anemia is probably multifactorial
and involves decreased RBC life span, decreased erythropoietin production, and the anemia of chronic disease.
Changes in the white blood count are often nonspecific,
although elevations are suggestive of an infectious disease process.

Management
Underlying cause
As GN is often secondary to an identifiable underlying disease (Table 12.14) and amyloidosis is associated
with chronic inflammation, a thorough search for an

K22463_C012.indd 470

inciting cause is essential. Infectious, neoplastic, endocrine, inflammatory, and drug-related causes must be
considered.

Infectious disease serology
Serologic tests should be selected on the basis of the
patient’s geographic location and relevant travel history.
Infectious diseases associated with PLN include Rocky
Mountain spotted fever, ehrlichiosis, borreliosis, leishmaniasis, babesiosis, and heartworm infection.

Radiography and ultrasound
Imaging plays an important role in the diagnostic plan
for PLN. PLN can be secondary to a neoplastic process and
ultrasound and radiographic studies, in combination with

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

471

12.29

12.30

12.31

12.32

Figures 12.29–12.32 Illustrations of the histologic and ultrastructural features of membranous glomerulonephritis in a dog. The
light microscopic appearance of representative glomeruli is shown stained with H&E (12.29), PAS (12.30), and Masson’s trichrome
(12.31). The transmission electron micrograph (12.32) shows intramembranous electron-dense immune deposits in the capillary wall.
(Courtesy R.P. Groman, G.E. Lees, B.R. Berridge, and F.J. Clubb Jr.)

a thorough physical examination, are essential in eliminating this as a possible underlying cause. Ultrasound
can also provide information about the renal architecture
and outflow tract, and it can be used to obtain renal biopsies in a minimally invasive fashion.
If an underlying disease process is found, then therapy
aimed at treating the primary condition should be initiated; otherwise, the condition is labeled as idiopathic.
Prognosis may be better if the cause can be identified and
treated.

Amyloidosis vs. glomerulonephritis
The only way to differentiate amyloidosis from GN is by
renal biopsy. There is no meaningful difference between
the clinical pathology and physical examination findings

K22463_C012.indd 471

in these two conditions. In addition, several forms of
GN are now recognized and can only be differentiated
on analysis of a renal biopsy sample examined by light,
electron, and immunofluorescence microscopy (GN and
GN2). At a minimum, examination by light microscopy
should be performed on all cases. Tissue samples should
be stained with periodic acid–Schiff (PAS), methenamine
silver, trichrome, and Congo red: PAS allows inspection
of the glomerular basement membrane for evidence of
scarring; methenamine silver allows for examination of
the basement membrane of the tubules, glomeruli, and
Bowman’s capsule; trichrome allows for visualization of
immunoglobulin deposits; Congo red, when viewed with
polarized light, will confirm or rule out the ­presence
of amyloid (Figure 12.33). There are two collaborating

25/04/16 11:10 pm

472

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 12.14 The various causes of protein-losing
glomerulonephritis in the dog and cat.

Infectious

Canine

Feline

Canine hepatitis

Feline leukemia
virus

Bacterial endocarditis

Feline infectious
peritonitis

Brucellosis

Mycoplasmal
polyarthritis

12.33

Dirofilariasis
Ehrlichiosis
Figure 12.33 Histopathology of the kidney of a dog with
amyloidosis. Red-staining amorphous amyloid is evident in the
glomeruli (arrow). (Courtesy D.F. Senior)

Leishmaniasis
Pyometra
Borreliosis

forms of GN have different treatment options and prognosis, these pathology services should be utilized whenever possible.

Rocky Mountain
spotted fever
Trypanosomiasis
Neoplasia

Leukemia

Leukemia

Lymphoma

Lymphoma

Systemic histocytosis

Others

Others
Inflammatory

Pancreatitis

Pancreatitis

Systemic lupus
erythematosus

Systemic lupus
erythematosus

Polyarthritis

Polyarthritis

Prostatitis

Cholangiohepatitis

Immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia
Other

Hyperadrenocorticism

Familial

Steroid administration

Idiopathic

Familial
Idiopathic

centers, one in North America (International Veterinary
Renal Pathology Service) and one in Europe (Utrecht
Veterinary Nephrology Service), with extensive experience analyzing renal biopsy specimens. Since different

K22463_C012.indd 472

Amyloid-specific treatment
Colchicine, an inhibitor of microtubule assembly, has been
shown to inhibit release of SAA from hepatocytes and
may be of benefit before signs of renal failure develop.
It has been used in humans with familial Mediterranean
fever to prevent onset of renal amyloidosis. The efficacy of this drug in the treatment of renal amyloidosis
in animals is not established. Colchicine has significant
side-effects including vomiting, diarrhea, and nausea. In
addition, there is no known benefit to starting treatment
after renal failure develops. The currently recommended
canine dose is 0.02–0.04 mg/kg PO q24h.
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) has been advocated for the
treatment of amyloidosis. Theoretical benefits include
solubilization of amyloid fibrils and reduced serum concentration of SAA as well as reduced renal inflammation.
There are no controlled clinical studies to determine
if DMSO is beneficial for small animals suffering from
amyloidosis, but an individual case report suggested a
positive response. The canine dose is 80 mg/kg diluted
1:4 with sterile saline given SC three times a week.
Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) is a derivative of DMSO
that can be given orally. Theoretical benefits are the same
as for DMSO but it is considered more convenient since it
can be given at home. It should be noted that there are
no clinical data to support the use of MSM. The currently
recommended canine dose is 88 mg/kg q8h.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

Glomerulonephritis-specific treatment
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition
In a blinded multicenter study of dogs with biopsy
confirmed GN, the ACEI enalapril (0.5 mg/kg q12–24h)
decreased the UPC ratio, lowered blood pressure, and
improved clinical outcome. Some of the effect is likely
due to decreased glomerular hypertension secondary to
dilation of the efferent arterioles. There is also evidence
that ACEIs may inhibit cytokine production, thereby
decreasing interstitial fibrosis. The goal of the therapy
is to reduce the UPC ratio by at least 50%, and preferably into the normal range. Although enalapril can be
used, it is cleared exclusively through the kidney, while
benazepril (0.25–0.5 mg/kg PO q12–24h), which has
renal and hepatic clearance, is preferred. If significant
reductions in proteinuria cannot be achieved with ACE
inhibition alone, angiotensin receptor blockers can be
added. Pharmacologic data are sparse; however, irbesartan (1–5 mg/kg PO q24h) and telmisartan (1.0–2.0 mg/kg
PO q24h) have been suggested.

473

is progressive and histopathology is unavailable, the
use of ­
immunosuppressive drugs could be considered
providing the owner is aware of potential risks. In cases
of peracute or rapidly progressive GN, mycophenolate
(10 mg/kg PO q12h) has been recommended with or without cyclophosphamide (200–250 mg/m2 every 3 weeks).
Response to treatment can be measured by changes to the
UPC ratio. A complete response is defined as a UPC ratio
of <0.5, while a partial response is defined as a reduction
of the UPC ratio by 50% of the pretreatment value. In
dogs that demonstrate no response to immunosuppressive therapy after 8 weeks, an alternative therapy can
be considered (Table 12.15). If after 3–4 months there is
no clinically significant response, therapy should be discontinued. In patients that do have a response to therapy,
immunosuppressive therapy should be continued for
12–16 weeks, after which the dose may be tapered while
monitoring the UPC ratio and degree of azotemia.

Immunosuppression

Common amyloidosis and glomerulonephritis
therapies
Diet

The role of immunosuppressive drugs in the treatment of
dogs with GN has changed dramatically in recent years.
When histopathologic evidence of an active immunologic basis for the PLN exists, immunosuppressive therapy is strongly recommended. Such evidence would
include electron-dense deposits detected on electron
microscopy and immunoglobulin or complement-associated immune complexes detected by immunofluorescent microscopy. Therefore, renal biopsies are strongly
­recommended in all cases of PLN. In cases where the PLN

Patients with PLN should be fed a properly formulated
renal failure diet that is low in protein, high in omega-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids, and low in sodium. Although
initially counterintuitive, PLN patients should be fed
a moderately protein-restricted diet. Studies in people
with PLN have shown that feeding a high protein diet is
associated with increased glomerular protein loss, additional renal pathology, and higher mortality. Conversely,
patients fed a low protein diet lose less protein in their
urine, have less renal pathology, and live longer. The

Table 12.15 Immunosuppressive drugs used in glomerulonephritis.
Agent

Mechanism

Dose

Azathioprine

Antagonizes purine metabolism. Interferes with DNA and RNA
synthesis. Cytotoxic to lymphocytes

2 mg/kg PO q24h for 1–2 weeks, then
1–2 mg/kg q48h

Chlorambucil

Alkylating agent. Interferes with DNA replication and RNA
transcription

0.2 mg/kg PO q24–48h

Cyclophosphamide

Alkylating agent. Interferes with DNA replication and RNA
transcription

Pulse therapy 200–250 mg/m2
every 3 weeks

Cyclosporine

Calcineurin inhibitor. Prevents activation of T cells

5–20 mg/kg PO q12h, taper dose
upward from low to high

Mycophenolate

Antagonizes guanosine metabolism. Suppresses T- and B-cell
proliferation

10 mg/kg PO q12h

K22463_C012.indd 473

25/04/16 11:10 pm

474

Diseases of specific organ systems

reason for this paradox is unclear but may involve the
damage caused to the tubule by the increased protein
available for loss into the urine.

Therefore, blood pressure should be checked ­periodically
and antihypertensive therapy administered as needed
(see Hypertension, below, for more information).

Thromboembolism

Fluid therapy

Thromboembolism is the cause of death for a significant number of dogs with glomerular disease. Much of
the blame has been placed on antithrombin III which,
because of its size, is lost through the damaged glomerulus at a rate comparable to albumin (Figures 12.34,
12.35). However, not all animals with low albumin experience thromboembolic events and therefore other factors
are likely involved. Risk of thromboembolism is greatest when antithrombin III is less than 75% of normal.
This correlates with a serum albumin of approximately
2.0 g/dl. There are few studies on which to base anti-­
coagulation recommendations. A low dose of aspirin has
been recommended to inhibit platelet aggregation and
clot formation; however, one recent study suggests that
the previously recommended dose of 0.5 mg/kg may be
too low to be efficacious. A dose of 1.0–5.0 mg/kg q24h
has now been suggested. Another option is clopidogrel
(1.1 mg/kg q24h). Clopidogrel is a platelet aggregation
inhibitor, which may be used in conjunction with or in
place of aspirin. Clopidogrel should not be given simultaneously with proton pump inhibitor antacid drugs
because the latter will delay the metabolism of the clopidogrel and predispose to bleeding problems associated
with platelet dysfunction.

While fluid therapy is a cornerstone in the treatment of
AKI and CKD, it should be used with great caution in PLN
patients. These patients are extremely vulnerable to fluid
overload and edema. In addition, studies in people and
animal models suggest that colloids should not be used
to prevent or treat edema as they can further potentiate
renal damage. When necessary, only enough fluids to
correct dehydration should be administered. This should
be done over relatively long periods of time (~24 hours)
and under close supervision. In patients where edema
has already occurred, fluid therapy should be stopped
and diuretic therapy with furosemide or spironolactone
should be considered.

Blood pressure
The vast majority of dogs with glomerular disease
develop significant hypertension during the course of
their disease. Hypertension can lead to ocular, cardiac, and
cerebral damage and potentiate further kidney injury.

AT III
inactivated by
serine proteases

Hepatic
AT III synthesis

12.34

HYPERTENSION
Definition/overview
Historically, the definition of ‘normal’ canine and feline
blood pressure has been the subject of debate. While there
is no clear definition, it is generally accepted that a single
blood pressure estimation of >150/95 mmHg in a patient
with clinical signs attributed to hypertension or a blood
pressure >150/95 mmHg on three separate visits in a
patient who demonstrates no clinical signs is compatible
with hypertension.

Etiology
Clinically, hypertension is divided into two categories
based on the underlying etiology: primary and secondary. Primary hypertension is the result of an imbalance

Plasma AT III

Plasma AT III

GI
AT III loss

12.35
AT III
inactivated by
serine proteases

Hepatic
AT III synthesis

Renal
AT III loss

GI
AT III loss

Renal
AT III loss

Figures 12.34, 12.35 Antithrombin III (AT III) balance in normal dogs (12.34) and in dogs with glomerulonephropathy (12.35). Loss of
glomerular sieve selectivity leads to massive renal excretion with subsequent reduced serum levels.

K22463_C012.indd 474

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

between cardiac output, systemic vascular resistance, and
the autonomic nervous system. Although primary hypertension accounts for more than 90% of all cases of elevated blood pressure in human patients, it is thought to
be uncommon in dogs and cats. Secondary hypertension
occurs as a consequence of another disease or medical
treatment and accounts for the majority of small animal
cases. Renal disease, hyperadrenocorticism, thyroid disease, diabetes mellitus, liver disease, pheochromocytoma,
chronic anemia, and drugs including erythropoietin and
glucocorticoids have all been associated with hypertension in dogs and cats. Clinically, this is important because
it allows clinicians to focus their blood pressure screening
efforts on specific ‘at-risk’ populations.

475

in cats with CKD that loss of vision and not the underlying
renal disease often initiates the clinic visit. Retinal edema,
tortuous vessels, and hemorrhage characterize hypertensive retinopathy (Figures 12.37a, b) while choroidopathy
results in ischemic necrosis of the choriocapillaries and
the retinal pigmented epithelium. This presents clinically
as blindness due to retinal detachment.
As the pressure against which the heart must pump
increases, changes occur in the cardiac muscle. Dogs
12.37

Pathophysiology
Normal blood pressure is the result of a complex interaction between the heart, the kidneys, the autonomic nervous system, and the endothelial signaling mechanisms
(Figure 12.36). These factors determine cardiac output
and systemic vascular resistance, which are the ultimate
blood pressure determinants (BP = CO × SVR). Although
the relationship between renal disease and hypertension
has been studied extensively, the connection between the
two remains elusive. Recent data suggest that the cause
of hypertension in renal failure patients is multifactorial.
a

Clinical presentation
When increases in blood pressure are mild, the patient
usually demonstrates no clinical signs directly attributable to hypertension. As the elevations in systolic pressure
approach 200 mmHg, the eyes, heart, brain, and kidneys
are organs in which clinical signs of hypertension become
apparent. Choroidopathy and retinopathy are so common
12.36
Heart
Autonomic input

Kidney
Renin–
angiotensin
system

Heart rate

Vessels
Endothelial
signaling

Blood
volume

Stroke
volume

Vasoconstriction/
vasodilatation

Preload

Cardiac output

Autonomic
Input
Nervous
system

Peripheral resistance

Blood pressure
Figure 12.36 Complex interactions between heart, kidneys,
vessels, nervous system, and endothelial signaling system,
which determine blood pressure.

K22463_C012.indd 475

b
Figures 12.37a, b (a) Ocular changes consistent with
hypertension. Note the tortuous vessels, hemorrhage, and
edema. (b) Retinal detachment secondary to hypertension.
(Courtesy P. Miller)

25/04/16 11:10 pm

476

Diseases of specific organ systems

develop left ventricular hypertrophy and commensurate
mitral valve insufficiency. Typically, cats develop thickening of the interventricular septum, hypertrophy of the
left ventricular free wall, reduced diastolic ventricular
internal diameter, and dilation of the proximal aorta.
Clinically, these changes can be detected as a murmur, an
arrhythmia, or a gallop rhythm.
As systolic blood pressure exceeds the capacity of the
autoregulatory mechanisms of the cerebral vasculature,
hypertensive encephalopathy becomes apparent. This is
characterized by a head tilt, ataxia, depression, disorientation, and seizures. This condition constitutes an emergency and is associated with a guarded prognosis.

12.38

a

Differential diagnosis
White coat effect, error in measurement.

Diagnosis
Systolic and diastolic blood pressure can be measured
directly by placing a catheter in a suitable artery and connecting it to a transducer (Figures 12.38a, b). While this
is the most accurate way to measure blood pressure, it is
invasive, painful, and neither convenient nor practical in
the clinical setting. Indirect measurements of blood pressure using Doppler and oscillometric techniques are most
useful in the clinic.
Oscillometric devices work by inflating a cuff around
a distal extremity until arterial blood flow is occluded
(Figure 12.39). The unit then slowly deflates the cuff
while monitoring for pulsations created by arterial blood
flow. Interestingly, these units actually measure mean
arterial pressure and then calculate systolic and diastolic
pressures using proprietary algorithms. Oscillometric
units are popular in clinical practice because they are
automated and provide systolic, diastolic, and mean arterial pressure. Nevertheless, these units can significantly
underestimate blood pressure when used on cats and
small dogs (<10 kg). Recently, new devices have been produced that claim to have been optimized for veterinary
use. The accuracy of these devices is not clear at this time.
Doppler flow detectors are less expensive, easy to use,
and suitable for dogs and cats of all sizes (Figure 12.40).
These devices work by emitting an ultrasound wave and
then comparing the frequency of the initial signal to
the one that is reflected back to the probe. If the wave
is reflected off of the surface of a moving object, such as
blood cells coursing through an artery, the frequency is
shifted. The Doppler unit makes this change in frequency
audible and the operator hears this as a characteristic
‘swoosh’ sound.
The first step in measuring blood pressure with a
Doppler unit is to palpate an artery in the distal portion

K22463_C012.indd 476

b
Figures 12.38a, b Direct blood pressure measurements
are made by placing a catheter in an artery, connecting the
catheter to a transducer, and displaying the blood pressure on a
monitor. (a) Patient with arterial catheter in a hindlimb and the
transducer at the level of the heart. (b) Multifunction monitor
displaying blood pressure.

of an extremity (Figures 12.41–12.45). The hair over
the artery is clipped and a cuff with a width 30–40% of
the circumference of the limb is placed proximal to the
clipped area. To ensure conduction, ultrasound gel is
placed on the Doppler probe and the probe is placed over
the clipped area. The probe is then adjusted until the
sound of arterial blood pulsations can be clearly heard.
The cuff is inflated approximately 10–20 mmHg past
the point at which blood flow can no longer be detected.
Then, the cuff is gradually deflated while the operator
observes the sphygmomanometer’s display. The pressure at which the sound of blood flow first returns is
the systolic pressure. Sometimes, a second sound, which
represents the diastolic pressure, can be heard as cuff

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

12.39

Figure 12.39 Oscillometric blood pressure measuring device.

477

12.40

Figure 12.40 Feline patient having blood pressure measured
with a Doppler device.

12.41

12.42

12.43

12.44

12.45
Figures 12.41–12.45 Measuring blood pressure using the
Doppler method. The artery is palpated (12.41) and an area over
the artery is clipped (12.42). A cuff, whose width is 30–40% the
circumference of the limb, is selected (12.43). Ultrasound gel is
placed on the probe to improve conduction (12.44). The probe
is placed over the artery and the sound of blood flowing is
heard. The cuff is inflated to 20 mmHg greater than needed to
occlude the blood flow and then the cuff is slowly deflated until
the sound of blood flowing is heard again (12.45). This sound
represents systolic blood pressure.

K22463_C012.indd 477

25/04/16 11:10 pm

478

Diseases of specific organ systems

deflation continues. Although the systolic blood pressure
is easily obtained, determining diastolic pressure can be
technically challenging.
Regardless of which blood pressure measuring technology is used, four principles help to ensure accurate
measurements: proper cuff size selection, consistency of
personnel, acclimation of the patient, and repeatability
of results. Perhaps the most important factor in attaining
accurate and repeatable blood pressure measurements
is the selection of a correctly sized cuff. Although some
veterinary oscillometric devices come with an integrated
cuff selection system, most blood pressure measurement
devices require that the operator select an appropriately
sized cuff. The width of the cuff should be 30–40% of the
circumference of the extremity. A cuff that is too wide
will underestimate blood pressure, while a cuff that is too
small will artificially increase values.
Consistency of personnel and technique are an essential part of obtaining accurate blood pressure measurements. Whenever possible, the same team should be
involved in the blood pressure measurement process
and they should utilize the same technique each time
blood pressure is measured. The phenomenon by which
this produces more accurate measurements is probably
related to operator experience.
The ‘white coat effect’ refers to the stress created by a
visit to the veterinarian and the effect that this can have
on blood pressure. While cats may be somewhat more
susceptible, nervousness or excitement can induce an
increase in canine blood pressure as well. In order to minimize the ‘white coat effect’, blood pressure should always
be measured in a quiet area away from other animals
and before other procedures are performed. The patient
should be allowed to acclimatize to its surroundings and
the owner should be present. Restraint should be kept to
an absolute minimum.

Individual blood pressure measurements can be inaccurate for a variety of reasons. Blood pressure measurements should be repeated four or five times and the
individual measurements compared. If there is a significant variation (>10%) between the measurements, the
readings should be discarded and the process repeated.
A diagnosis of hypertension in an asymptomatic patient
should be confirmed by repeating the blood pressure
measurements on three different office visits.

Management
As most small animals with elevated blood pressure suffer from secondary hypertension, the first step should be
to identify and, when possible, treat the underlying condition. Often, this will decrease systolic blood pressure
and make the hypertension more amenable to therapy;
however, in some conditions, such as CKD, therapy may
have minimal effect on blood pressure.

Dog-specific therapy
ACEIs are the initial drug of choice in treating canine
hypertension (Table 12.16). ACEIs exert their effect
by blocking the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II and help lower blood pressure in three ways.
First, angiotensin II is a powerful vasoconstrictor and
inhibiting its synthesis leads to systemic vasodilatation. Second, angiotensin II directly promotes sodium
absorption in the proximal tubule; this leads to intravascular volume expansion. Last, aldosterone release is
stimulated by angiotensin II and this further promotes
renal sodium and water resorption. The two most commonly used ACEIs are enalapril and benazepril. Because
enalapril is cleared exclusively by the kidneys and its
half-life can be significantly increased by renal disease, its use should be avoided in CKD patients. Instead,
benazepril, which is cleared by the kidneys and liver,

Table 12.16 Commonly used antihypertensive drugs in the dog and cat.
Drug

Class

Canine dose

Feline dose

Enalapril

ACE inhibitor

0.5–1.0 mg/kg PO q12–24h

0.25–0.5 mg/kg PO q12–24h

Benazepril

ACE inhibitor

0.25–0.5 mg/kg PO q12–24h

0.25–0.5 mg/kg PO q12–24h

Amlodipine

Ca++ channel blocker

0.05–0.1 mg/kg PO q24h

0.625–1.25 mg/cat PO q24h

Atenolol

Beta-1 blocker

0.25–1.0 mg/kg PO q12–24h

6.25–12.5 mg/cat PO q12–24h

Propranolol

Beta blocker

2.5–10 mg/dog PO q8–12h

2.5–5 mg/cat PO q8–12h

Prazosin

Alpha blocker

0.5–2.0 mg/dog q12h

Not recommended

Spironolactone

Aldosterone inhibitor

1.0–2.0 mg/kg PO q12h

1.0–2.0 mg/kg PO q12h

K22463_C012.indd 478

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

is preferred. In some CKD patients, ACEIs have been
associated with a worsening of azotemia; therefore,
­
renal values should be checked 7–14 days after starting
therapy in these patients.
Often, ACEIs fail to produce the desired decrease in
blood pressure as sole agent therapy. In these hypertensive patients, a calcium channel blocker can be added
to the ACEI therapy. These agents exert their effects by
blocking the influx of calcium needed to cause smooth
muscle contraction and act to decrease systemic vascular
resistance. Amlodipine besylate (Table 12.16) is the most
widely used calcium channel blocker. Channel blockers
have the potential to worsen renal disease when used as
a monotherapy agent in dogs. This effect is thought to be
due to the calcium channel blocker’s preferential dilation
of the glomerular afferent arteriole resulting in glomerular hypertension. ACEIs preferentially dilate the efferent
arteriole, normalizing glomerular pressures and preventing renal damage; therefore, calcium channel blockers
should be used in conjunction with ACEIs when treating
canine hypertension.

Cat-specific therapy
ACEIs are less effective in treating feline hypertension.
Studies have shown that as many as 50% of hypertensive
cats fail to respond to enalapril. While benazepril has
been shown to produce a statistically significant decrease
in feline blood pressure, the actual reduction is relatively
modest. For this reason, calcium channel blockers have
become the drug of choice in controlling feline hypertension. Amlodipine besylate (Table 12.16) is the most
widely utilized calcium channel blocker for controlling
feline hypertension. As in the dog, it is long acting and
gradual in effect. Although use of amlodipine as a monotherapy agent is discouraged in the dog, using calcium
channel blockers alone does not appear to cause glomerular injury in cats; therefore, they are considered safe as
a single agent therapy. In cases where amlodipine fails to
produce the desired decrease in blood pressure, an ACEI
can be added to the treatment protocol (Table 12.16).

Adjunctive therapy
Beta blockers are useful adjunctive therapy in dogs or
cats where the initial antihypertensive agent has failed
to produce the desired effect. Beta-adrenergic receptors
are found in both the heart (beta-1) and lungs (beta-2).
Blockade of the beta-1 receptors slows the heart and
­lowers blood pressure while blockade of the beta-2 receptors can trigger bronchial constriction. Therefore, only
selective beta-1 antagonists (Table 12.16) should be
­
utilized.

K22463_C012.indd 479

479

Alpha blockers decrease blood pressure by selectively
antagonizing adrenergic receptors on the systemic vasculature, resulting in a decrease in systemic vascular
resistance. Prazosin, a potent alpha inhibitor, has successfully been used as primary and adjunctive treatment for
hypertension in the dog (Table 12.16). The use of prazosin
in cats as an antihypertensive agent has not been fully
evaluated and is therefore not recommended.
It has long been known that aldosterone contributes to hyptertension by stimulating sodium and water
reabsorption in the kidney and thereby increasing
intravascular volume. Aldosterone antagonists such as
spironolactone have been used to counteract these hypertensive effects. More recently, it has become apparent
that aldosterone plays a role in the inflammation, fibrosis, and necrosis seen in hypertension-induced end organ
damage. Inhibiting aldosterone appears to protect the
heart, brain, and kidneys from the deleterious effects of
hypertension. Although this information is preliminary
and more research is needed, hypertensive patients may
benefit from the use of aldosterone antagonists such as
spironolactone (Table 12.16).

Goals and monitoring
The goal of treating hypertensive patients is to gradually
lower systolic pressure to <160 mmHg. It is important
in the initial stages of treatment to monitor the patient
regularly and avoid making rapid adjustments in medication. Changes in antihypertensive therapy should only
be made every 2 weeks. Once the patient’s blood pressure has been regulated, it should be rechecked every
3 months. CBC and serum chemistry should be checked
twice a year.

INCONTINENCE
Definition/overview
Incontinence refers to involuntary escape of urine during
the storage phase of the urinary cycle. This can present in
different ways; however, the most common presentation
is an intermittent or continuous dribbling of urine combined with episodes of normal voiding.

Etiology
Causes of incontinence include urethral sphincter incompetence, anatomic abnormality in the termination of the
ureters, an inability of the bladder to dilate, spasms of the
bladder, or damage to the nerves controlling micturition
(Table 12.17); however, urethral sphincter incompetence
and ectopic ureters (EUs) account for 85% of all incontinence cases.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

480

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 12.17 Causes of incontinence in dogs.
Cause

Typical signalment

Clinical signs

Relative frequency

Urethral incompetence

Post-spay female

Dribbling of urine when resting. Previously
normal urination

Frequent

Ectopic ureters

Young female

Continual urine dribbling. Noted from
early age

Common

Detrusor instability:
•• Urge incontinence
•• Idiopathic instability

Middle aged female

Nocturia, pollakiuria, urgency, incontinence

Less common

Neurologic disease

None

Upper motor: erratic reflexive bladder
emptying with a difficult to express bladder.
Lower motor: no attempts to urinate, easily
expressed bladder

Less common

Pelvic entrapment of bladder

Adult large breed female

Continual urine dribbling

Less common

Urovaginal fistula

Incontinence following
spaying

Continual urine dribbling

Uncommon

Urorectal fistula

Young dog or post
trauma

Chronic urinary tract infection, with passage
of urine from rectum

Uncommon

Pathophysiology
The urinary cycle is divided into two phases: the filling
phase, and the emptying phase (Figure 12.46). During the
filling phase, the hypogastric nerve provides sympathetic
stimulation of beta receptors in the body of the bladder,
resulting in relaxation and stretching, while stimulation
of alpha receptors in the bladder’s trigone region and
proximal urethra causes constriction (Figure 12.47). Thus,
the sympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system
dominates the filling phase of micturition by constricting
the outflow of the bladder while allowing the body of the
bladder to distend. Additionally, sympathetic stimulation
blocks parasympathetic transmission thereby inhibiting
urination.
As the bladder fills, sensory receptors embedded in the
wall of the bladder become active and signals travel via
the pelvic nerve to the spinal cord. This information is
relayed to the brainstem where afferent impulses are integrated with information from the forebrain. Once it is an
appropriate time to void, the impulse to empty the bladder is carried down the spinal cord. Parasympathetic neurons located in the pelvic nerve transmit impulses to the
parasympathetic ganglia in the bladder wall. Nerve fibers
leave this nucleus and innervate smooth ­muscle fibers of
the detrusor muscle causing contraction of the bladder
body and relaxation of the bladder neck. At the same
time, reflex contraction of the striated muscle of the
urethra, mediated by the pudendal nerve, is inhibited.

K22463_C012.indd 480

12.46
Kidney Ureter Bladder Urethra
Vagina
Urethral
papilla

Female

Vestibule

Kidney Ureter Bladder
Male

Prostatic
urethra

Extraprostatic
urethra
Vas
deferens

Figure 12.46 Functional components of the urinary tract.
Urine is produced in the kidney, travels to the bladder via the
ureter, and is stored in the bladder. The urethra acts as a valve
and prevents the dribbling of urine and, when appropriate,
directs urine out of the body.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

481

12.47
Inhibitory reflex
L1–L2
S1–S2
Para

Symp

Soma

Caudal mesenteric
ganglion

Pudendal
nerve

Pelvic
nerve

Hypogastric
nerve

h ACh

tc

re
St

α
Stretch

NE

β
NE

Pelvic nerve ganglion

Figure 12.47 Schematic diagram representing the autonomic and somatic innervation of the bladder and urethra. Sympathetic
nerve fibers responsible for the storage phase of urination travel in the hypogastric nerve and stimulate receptors in the body and
neck of the bladder. Beta receptors in the body of the bladder allow the detrusor muscle to relax and fill. Alpha receptors in the neck
of the bladder and proximal urethra result in contraction and continence. Parasympathetic nerve fibers responsible for the voiding
phase of the urinary cycle travel in the pelvic nerve. Sensory information travels from the bladder to the spinal cord via the pelvic
nerve. Somatic control of the external urethral sphincter travels in the pudendal nerve.

The parasympathetic nervous ­
system ­
dominates the
emptying phase of the urinary cycle by coordinating
­
the contraction of the bladder as well as relaxation of the
bladder neck, proximal urethra, and external sphincter.
Urethral sphincter incompetence is the most common cause of canine urinary incontinence. Although
it has been reported in males, it is much more common
in females and affects approximately 10% of all spayed
females. The incidence in large breed dogs approaches
12.5%. The onset of incontinence is usually seen 2–3 years
after an uneventful ovariohysterectomy but can occur
any time after the procedure. In dogs with severe abnormalities, incontinence can occur before ovariectomy
and the condition is worsened after the spay operation.
Owners typically describe a dribbling of urine that is
most noticeable when the animal is asleep. The exact
mechanism by which removal of the ovaries leads to
incontinence is unknown. Estrogen increases both the
number and sensitivity of the alpha-adrenergic receptors of the smooth muscle internal urethral sphincter,
so decreased estrogen stimulation tends to reduce the
contractile responsive of the urethral smooth muscle
to sympathetic stimulation. However, a number of dogs
with spay-related urinary incontinence do not respond

K22463_C012.indd 481

Urethral

Normal ureter

12.48

Vaginal

Figure 12.48 Normal termination of the ureter contrasted with
extramural ectopic ureters.

to estrogen supplementation and dogs in which estrogen
secretion has been suppressed with progesterone do not
appear to develop urethral incompetence.
EUs are a congenital abnormality characterized by termination of one or both ureters at a point distal to the
neck of the bladder (Figure 12.48). Thus, the flow of urine
bypasses the neck of the bladder and affected animals

25/04/16 11:10 pm

482

Diseases of specific organ systems

typically leak urine from birth. EUs are ­
categorized
as extramural and intramural based on their point of
attachment and behavior. An extramural EU attaches
and empties directly into the urethra or, in rare cases, the
vagina or uterus. Intramural EUs attach to the bladder
and tunnel below the submucosa and into the urethra
or vagina. In cases of unilateral EU, normal urine voiding is reported as one ureter is properly emptying into
the bladder. Normal urination may or may not occur in
bilateral cases. Almost 90% of canine EUs occur in females
and 25% of these are bilateral. Although EUs have been
reported in cats, they are less common than in dogs.
Detrusor instability is characterized by sudden
urgency to urinate and an involuntary bladder contraction (Figure 12.49). When this occurs secondary to infection, neoplasia, or urolithiasis, this instability is referred
to as urge incontinence. When an underlying inflammatory condition is not diagnosed, the condition is called
idiopathic detrusor instability.
Caudal location of the bladder within the pelvis (‘pelvic
bladder’) has also been associated with urinary incontinence. Although this condition is most often seen in large
breed female dogs, it has also been reported in males. In
normal patients, the bladder is positioned in the abdomen while in affected dogs the bladder neck and some
portion of the body are located in the pelvic canal. It is not
clear why 50% of dogs with this condition are incontinent
while the others are unaffected. It has been proposed that
‘pelvic bladder’ is part of a syndrome characterized by
shortened urethra, dysfunctional detrusor, and abnormal
urethral musculature.
Urovaginal and urethrorectal fistulas are both uncommon causes of incontinence in the dog. Urethrorectal
fistulas typically present with persistent urinary tract
infections (UTIs) and passage of urine from the anus.
Urovaginal fistulas have been documented as a complication of ovariohysterectomy and develop secondary to
entrapment of the distal ureter by a ligature. Typically,
these present for incontinence shortly after an otherwise
uneventful spay and are unresponsive to medical management. Urethrorectal fistulas may be congenital or
be the result of trauma. Although English Bulldogs are
thought to have a genetic predisposition to developing a
congenital form of this condition, it has been described in
other breeds.

Clinical presentation
The most common presentation is an intermittent or
continuous dribbling of urine combined with episodes of
normal voiding.

K22463_C012.indd 482

12.49

Figure 12.49 Dog with urge incontinence. The patient was
later found to have a bladder mass.

Differential diagnosis
Nocturia, pollakiuria, and urgency.

Diagnosis
A detailed history that focuses on the timing, volume,
events surrounding the leakage of urine (e.g. sleeping,
excitement), and spinal trauma are essential. In addition,
determining the quality and quantity of the purposeful urinations is important. Nocturia, pollakiuria, and
urgency, which can all be confused with incontinence,
can be eliminated on the basis of a thorough history.
A detailed inspection of the genitals should be performed. The area around the genitals should be checked
for moisture, urine staining of the fur, and skin scalding.
The external genitalia should be examined to be sure they
are anatomically correct. Observing the animal ­urinate
can be helpful in confirming normal micturition.
Laboratory data should include a CBC, serum chemistry
panel, and urinalysis with aerobic culture. The CBC and
chemistry panel help rule out systemic disease while the
urinalysis may implicate cystitis as a cause of the incontinence. Urine culture results can be difficult to interpret.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

483

Although UTIs can lead to urge incontinence, infection
can also be the result of anatomic abnormalities.
A thorough neurologic examination is a critical part
of the incontinence work up. Disorders affecting the spinal cord above the fifth lumbar vertebra (upper motor
neuron lesions) produce an involuntary, erratic, reflexive emptying of the bladder with increased resistance
of the external urethral sphincter. Clinically, these animals present with significant neurologic abnormalities that are relatively easy to detect, including paresis,
paralysis, hyperreflexia, decreased proprioception, and
decreased pain perception. Lesions of the sacral spinal
cord (lower motor neuron lesions) prevent bladder sensation from traveling up the spinal cord and as a result, the
patient makes no attempts to urinate even as the bladder becomes overdistended. Sacral lesions also affect the
pudendal nerve and result in the loss of external sphincter resistance. Typically, patients with sacral lesions have
an easily expressed overdistended bladder and they
dribble urine. Lower motor neuron lesions can be more
difficult to detect as they present with no obvious signs
of neurologic dysfunction. In cases where the function of
the pudendal nerve is in question, squeezing the distal
portion of the penis or edge of the vulva and observing
the anus for a reflexive contraction can help evaluate
afferent and efferent pudendal nerve function.

young. Interestingly, because of the small volume of
urine produced and the expectation that young puppies
will have ‘accidents’, this condition is often overlooked
until the patient is several months old. The diagnosis of
EUs has historically been made on the basis of excretory
urography, retrograde vaginourethrography, or some
combination of these procedures. Collectively, these tests
have a sensitivity of only 70–80%. More recently, the use
of rigid cystoscopy has been shown to be 100% sensitive
and has become the method of choice for diagnosing this
­condition (Figure 12.51).

Spay-related incontinence

Figure 12.50 Urethra pressure profile.

Due to the prevalence of urethral incompetence in middle
aged spayed dogs, the typical clinical presentation, and
the relative safety of the drugs used to treat this condition, the diagnosis is often made empirically (Table 12.17).
Definitive diagnosis requires a urethral pressure profile. In
this test, a special multilumen catheter is pulled through
the length of the urethra (Figure 12.50). The catheter is
designed so that while one lumen measures the pressure
generated by the urethra, another at the tip of the catheter measures the pressure in the bladder. At the end of the
procedure a computer calculates the pressure generated by
the urethra that is in excess of that which is generated by
the bladder (urethral closure pressure). It also determines
the functional length of the bladder. Using this information, the clinician can determine if the force exerted and
the length of the urethra are normal. The cost and availability of this procedure limit its use to atypical cases and
those that fail to respond to medical management.

12.50

Within the
urethra
Within the
bladder
lumen

12.51

Ectopic ureters
Typically, EUs are suspected in young female dogs that
have a history of dribbling urine since they were very

K22463_C012.indd 483

Figure 12.51 Example of an ectopic ureter opening into the
urethra as seen with a rigid cystoscope.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

484

Diseases of specific organ systems

Urge incontinence/idiopathic detrusor instability
The diagnosis of urge incontinence is made on the
basis of finding an underlying cause for the bladder
­instability. As in all cases of incontinence, a thorough
physical ­examination, neurologic examination, history,
and u
­rinalysis with microscopic examination of the
sediment and culture are essential. Radiography and
ultrasound of the lower urinary tract are also important
to look for neoplasia, urolithiasis, or structural abnormalities (Figure 12.52). Diagnosis of idiopathic detrusor ­instability is made first by ruling out all possible
causes of urge i­ncontinence and then on the results of a
­cystometrogram. During this test, a catheter is placed in
the b
­ ladder and is slowly filled with saline. The ­normal
canine ­bladder will allow ­uninterrupted filling until a
threshold ­volume of 22 ml/kg is reached. At this point,
involuntary ­
­
bladder ­
contractions begin. Dogs with
­idiopathic ­detrusor ­instability will experience involuntary bladder ­contractions at a greatly reduced bladder
volume. While simple in principle, the equipment to
perform this test is quite sophisticated and expensive
and is only available at a limited number of referral
institutions.

an abnormal urethral musculature, a urethra pressure
­profile is indicated.

Urovaginal/urethrorectal fistulas
Diagnosis of urovaginal and urethrorectal fistulas
requires specialized radiographic procedures. Urovaginal
fistulas are often visualized with IV urography but may
require more invasive techniques such as antegrade ureterography. Urethrorectal fistulas can be diagnosed with
12.53

Pelvic bladder
Initial diagnosis of a pelvic bladder is made on the
basis of contrast radiographs (Figures 12.53, 12.54).
Contrast radiographs show an abnormally shaped, caudally displaced bladder that fails to taper at the junction
with the urethra. Since dogs with pelvic bladder syndrome will demonstrate a dysfunctional detrusor and

12.54

12.52

Figure 12.52 Ultrasound of a bladder reveals a mass (between
arrowheads). The mass was eventually determined to be a
tissue reaction to suture material used in a previous cystotomy.

K22463_C012.indd 484

Figures 12.53, 12.54 Pelvic bladders are usually seen in female
dogs; however, this example is in a 2-year-old male Greyhound.
Note the position of the bladder and its failure to taper at
the junction with the urethra. A urethral pressure profile and
cystometrogram revealed a nonresponsive detrusor muscle and
incompetent urethra.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

either a cystogram or retrograde urethrogram performed
under fluoroscopy.

Management
Spay-related incontinence
For many years, alpha-adrenergic agonists such as
phenylpropanolamine have been the mainstay for
­
the treatment of spay-related urethral incompetence
(Table 12.18). Total resolution of urinary incontinence
can be expected in 85% of cases, while a significant
improvement in clinical signs occurs in most dogs. Since
the side-effects of phenylpropanolamine include hypertension, tachycardia, increased intraocular pressure,
and hepatic glycogenolysis, this drug should be avoided
in patients with hypertension, glaucoma, or diabetes
mellitus. Recently, the United States Food and Drug
Administration has approved estriol (Incurin™), a synthetic estrogen, for urethral sphincter incompetence.
This medication, which is now available in many countries, has proven to be efficacious when used alone or in
combination with phenylpropanolamine. Common side-­
effects include loss of appetite, vomiting, excessive water
drinking, and a swollen vulva. For most patients, these
seem to resolve fairly quickly. Unlike previously available
estrogen formulations, estriol does not appear to cause
bone marrow suppression, alopecia, behavioral change,
or signs consistent with estrus.
For the small percentage of urethral incompetence
patients that do not adequately respond to medical
management, several procedural options exist. The first,
urethral collagen injection, involves the endoscopic placement of collagen or extracellular matrix into the urethral
submucosa. In one study, 68% of dogs treated with this
method attained full urinary continence, and an additional 25% of owners reported a significant decrease in
their pet’s urine dribbling. These endoscopically placed

485

injections result in bulging of the urethra into the lumen
and significantly improved urethral closure pressure. The
primary limitation of this procedure seems to be its temporary nature, as many dogs return to incontinence over
time. While many of the dogs that relapse will respond to
medical management, most will eventually require additional urethral injections.
Another option is the surgical placement of a ­hydraulic
urethral occluder, which is an inflatable silicone cuff
that is surgically placed around the proximal urethra
(Figures 12.55a–d). The cuff is attached to an inflation
port, which is secured subcutaneously to the abdominal
wall. The occluder works by providing resistance to the
proximal urethra. When the patient urinates, pressure
in the bladder overcomes the resistance and normal
­micturition occurs. Interestingly, the resistance provided
by the occluder can be adjusted through the injection
port.

Ectopic ureters
Since extramural EUs attach and directly empty into the
urethra, the vagina, or the uterus, they must be surgically
reimplanted. Intramural EUs, however, attach to the bladder correctly and then tunnel below the submucosa and
into the urethra or vagina. These are amenable to correction by laser ablation, which is less invasive, more effective,
and associated with fewer complications than currently
performed surgical techniques (Figures 12.56a, b).
Many dogs will experience some degree of incontinence after EU correction. Although the reason for the
sphincter incompetence is not clear, a urethral pressure
profile may help identify which animals will be continent, continent with medication, or incontinent after
surgery. Unfortunately, this procedure is not definitive, is
expensive, and is available at a limited number of referral
institutions.

Table 12.18 Commonly used drugs for treating incontinence.
Drug

Class

Dose

Phenylpropanolamine

Alpha-agonist

1.0–4.0 mg/kg q8–12h

Estriol (Incurin™)

Synthetic estrogen

2.0 mg/dog q24h for 14 days then
decrease to lowest possible dose. Allow
7 days between adjustments

Flavoxate

Anticholinergic

100–200 mg/dog q6–8h

Oxybutinin

Anticholinergic

5.0 mg/dog q6–8h

Dicyclomine

Anticholinergic

10.0 mg/dog q6–8h

K22463_C012.indd 485

25/04/16 11:10 pm

486

Diseases of specific organ systems

12.55

a

b

c

d

Figures 12.55a–d (a) Hydraulic urethral occlusion device. Note the cuff, which will be surgically placed around the
urethra, and the inflation port, which will be secured subcutaneously to the abdominal wall. (b, c) Close-up of a cuff
that will be placed around the neck of the bladder. (d) Cuff placed around the urethra. (Courtesy A. Berent)

12.56

a

b

Figures 12.56a, b Example of an intramural ectopic ureter corrected by laser ablation. (a) An endoscope has been
used to place a guide wire in an ectopic ureter. Note that the ectopic ureter tunnels alongside and opens into the
urethra near the opening into the vestibule. (b) Endoscopically directed holmium YAG laser fiber being used to
oblate the ectopic ureter. This procedure continues until the ureter opens into the bladder.

K22463_C012.indd 486

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

Hydronephrosis is common in dogs born with EUs.
Abdominal ultrasound should be performed to examine
the architecture of the kidney and determine the need for
additional renal function testing. A hydronephrotic functionless kidney should be removed.

Urge incontinence/idiopathic detrusor instability
Treatment of urge incontinence is based on successful resolution of the underlying condition. Usually, no
additional therapy is needed. Treatment for idiopathic
detrusor instability relies on anticholinergic drugs that
interfere with the parasympathetic nervous system’s
stimulatory effect on the detrusor muscle. Commonly
used drugs include flavoxate, oxybutynin, and dicyclomine (Table 12.18).

Pelvic bladder
Treatment of pelvic bladder syndrome is often unrewarding. Treatment with phenylpropanolamine is
thought to be helpful but unlikely to resolve incontinence
(Table 12.18). Some have recommended colposuspension,
a surgery where the bladder is repositioned in the abdomen in cases where medical management is unrewarding. At this time, there is little evidence to support the use
of this procedure.

Urovaginal and urethrorectal fistulas
Surgical correction of these abnormalities has been
described. Generally, a good outcome is expected.

FELINE LOWER URINARY TRACT DISEASE
Definition/overview
Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD) is a term
given to cats that present exhibiting certain clinical
signs including straining to urinate, hematuria, pollakiuria, and periuria. FLUTD accounts for nearly 5% of all
cats presenting for veterinary care. The condition can be
divided into two groups: cats that present with a urethral
obstruction, and cats that are not obstructed but are displaying clinical signs. While the former group is almost
always male, the latter can be male or female. A cat with
an obstructed urethra is always a medical emergency.

487

Pathophysiology
Most obstructions are the result of urethral spasms
and/or plugs. Urethral spasms are thought to be the
result of inflammation and irritation of the urethral
musculature. The origin of the ‘urethral plug’ is unknown,
although they are often a mix of a proteinaceous matrix
and struvite crystals (Figure 12.57). It is thought that
inflammation of the urinary tract leads to leakage of
plasma, including albumin and bicarbonate, into the
urine. This provides the protein needed for matrix formation and increases the urine pH, promoting the formation
of struvite crystals. The protein matrix forms a web-like
structure in the urethra that traps the struvite crystals,
thus leading to the plug.
In the nonobstructed patient, periuria (urinating
around) is the clinical sign that most often initiates the
visit to a veterinarian. The clinician must differentiate
cats with FLUTD from those with behavioral issues. Other
potential considerations include uroliths, UTIs, and neoplasia. Urine osmolality in young healthy cats is so high
that it acts to inhibit bacterial growth. This, combined
with host defense mechanisms, make UTIs extremely
rare in these patients; therefore, empirical treatment
with antibiotics is unlikely to be efficacious. Urinary tract
neoplasia is also uncommon. Despite extensive diagnostics, no specific underlying cause (e.g. stones, UTI) can be
determined in more than 70% of FLUTD cats, and these
are categorized as feline idiopathic cystitis (FIC).
When normal cats are subjected to stressful events,
(e.g. change in the environment), there is an initial catecholamine release followed by a period of acclimation
and a return to baseline levels. Cats with FIC may have an
exaggerated and extended catecholamine response that
may be similar to anxiety disorders seen in some people.
12.57

Etiology
The most common cause of all cases of FLUTD is idiopathic cystitis. This is a diagnosis of exclusion and
accounts for almost 70% of affected cats. Only about 15%
of cats with lower urinary tract signs have uroliths. UTIs
are extremely uncommon and make up less than 2% of
these patients.

K22463_C012.indd 487

Figure 12.57 Urethral plug from a cat with urethral
obstruction. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 11:10 pm

488

Diseases of specific organ systems

This suggests that cats with FIC may have an inappropriate response to stress.
Besides generalized anxiety, this catecholamine
release can also have an effect on specific organs. For
example, in the bladder, sensory neurons are activated
and perpetuate bladder wall inflammation.
Cats with FIC also have abnormalities in the mucus
covering of the uroendothelium, histologic changes in the
endothelium of the bladder wall, and abnormalities of the
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis. How these findings
fit together to produce the constellation of clinical signs
seen with FIC is not clear. Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs)
are an important part of the protective mucus layer that
covers the urinary tract. Cats with FIC produce smaller
amounts of GAGs (particularly GAG GP-51) than normal
felines. Without this protective layer, irritants (e.g. hydrogen, calcium, potassium) found in urine come in contact
with the bladder wall. Sensory neurons (C fibers) relay
information through the spinal cord, causing the brain to
sense pain. Locally, the noxious stimuli cause neurogenic
inflammation (substance P release resulting in vascular
leakage and histamine release) (Figure 12.58).

Clinical presentation
Obstructive
Urethral obstruction typically occurs in male cats between
1 and 6 years of age. Obstructed cats strain unproductively to urinate and may cry out during the attempt.
Owners often mistake these attempts for constipation.
12.58

Licking of the genital region is also frequently observed.
Patients often hide in a secluded area. Patients examined soon after obstruction may be fractious and resist
examination. After more prolonged obstruction, patients
become progressively more depressed. An enlarged firm
bladder is felt on abdominal palpation.

Nonobstructive
Signs of nonobstructive FLUTD are variable but usually
include stranguria, pollakiuria, hematuria, and dysuria.
Affected cats may vocalize during urination and urinate in inappropriate places. The bladder of cats with
nonobstructed FLUTD is usually small with a thickened
wall. Attempts at collecting urine through cystocentesis are often unrewarding due to the frequent attempts
at ­urination that occur, especially when the patient is
handled.

Differential diagnosis
Inappropriate urination (behavorial), uroliths, UTI,
­neoplasia, anatomic defects.

Diagnosis
All cats presenting for FLUTD should have diagnostic
imaging performed. This will allow for inspection of the
urinary tract for uroliths, anatomic malformations, and
neoplasia. As for many urinary tract conditions, ultrasound in the hands of a skilled operator is likely to yield
more information than radiography. Nevertheless, treatment of an unstable obstructed patient should not be
delayed. In these cases, imaging studies should be performed once the obstruction is relieved.

Obstructive
Obstructive FLUTD is identified by palpation of an
enlarged, firm bladder. Urinalysis and urine culture can
be performed on urine collected by cystocentesis before
urethral catheterization or via the catheter after relief of
the obstruction. Serum creatinine and BUN allow assessment of the degree of azotemia; however, these are likely
to resolve quickly once the obstruction is relieved. Serum
potassium levels and an ECG tracing should always be
performed in depressed cats to assess cardiotoxicity associated with hyperkalemia.
Figure 12.58 Cystoscopic view of submucosal hemorrhages,
called glomerulations, in a cat with idiopathic feline lower
urinary tract disease. This lesion is seen when the bladder
is distended to about 80 cm of water pressure. The finding
is nonspecific but does not appear in normal cats. (Courtesy
D.F. Senior)

K22463_C012.indd 488

Nonobstructive
Along with diagnostic imaging, laboratory data should
include a CBC, serum chemistry panel, and urinalysis
with aerobic culture. The CBC and chemistry panel help
rule out systemic disease. Crystalluria is not an uncommon urinalysis finding and is unlikely to be the cause

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

of the condition; rather, it is most likely a result of the
inflammation. For this reason, the crystalluria is not
usually considered a therapeutic target. The presence
of white cells is not unexpected with inflammation and
should not be associated with UTIs.

Management
The first step in assessing a cat that presents with FLUTD
is to quickly recognize patients that are obstructed.
These cats are almost always male and can be identified by p
­ alpation of an enlarged, firm bladder. Affected
cats may be azotemic, hyperkalemic, acidotic, or bradycardic, and have an ECG consistent with atrial standstill
secondary to hyperkalemia (e.g. absence of P waves,
­
prolonged QRS, spiked T waves) (Figure 12.59). Patients
should have an IV catheter placed and be sedated (e.g.
ketamine and valium). A treatment algorithm is shown
in Figure 12.60.
Once a urinary catheter is placed (Figures 12.61a, b),
urine output should be monitored for at least 24–48
hours for evidence of postobstructive diuresis. This is a
high rate of urine output that occurs when an obstruction is relieved. The cause is unknown; however, significant amounts of dilute urine can be produced, leading
to hypovolemia. Recommendations are to measure urine
output every 2–4 hours and set an IV fluid rate such that
IV fluids given match those lost to excessive urination.
Fortunately, postobstructive diuresis is self-limiting and
usually resolves in 24–48 hours. It is not clear if there is an
optimal amount of time to leave the urinary catheter in
place; however, it seems prudent to wait for postobstructive diuresis (if any) to resolve and the urine to seem clear.
A wide variety of empirical treatments have been
claimed to be successful in the treatment of idiopathic
FLUTD. The waxing–waning nature of the clinical signs
makes evaluation of treatment modalities difficult.
Compounding the problem is a lack of well-controlled
clinical trials. Nevertheless, a multifaceted approach
involving environmental enrichment, diet, pheromones,
and drugs seems to alleviate signs and decrease recurrence in many cats.

489

12.59
0: 00: 32

Figure 12.59 An ECG example of hyperkalemia causing
atrial standstill. Note the characteristic absence of P waves,
prolonged QRS, and spiked T waves.

Obstructive algorithm:

12.60

•• Draw blood for possible serum chemistry and
electrolytes.
•• Place IV catheter and begin fluids.
•• Monitor ECG and treat hyperkalemia as needed
(Table 12.7).
•• Carefully attempt to catheterize with a sterile Slippery
Sam™ or 3.5-French open-end tomcat catheter
(Figures 12.61a, b).
•• If obstruction cannot be relieved, attempt to dislodge by
flushing urethra with sterile saline or lactated Ringer’s
solution.
•• If bladder is extremely firm, remove urine by
­cystocentesis. This decreases back-pressure and allows
for aseptic ­collection of urine for analysis and culture.
•• If obstruction will not dislodge, use retropulsion with the
urethral orifice pinched off.
•• A small amount of lidocaine gel may be infused into the
catheter to decrease urethral spasm.
Once urethral patency is established:
•• If a ‘Slippery Sam’ catheter was used to relieve
­obstruction, the catheter can be sutured in place.
•• If a tomcat catheter was used:
○○ Measure distance from prepuce to neck of bladder.
○○ Note distance on a sterile 5-French polyvinyl catheter
(soft red rubber) and insert into the urethra up to that
point.
○○ Place tape on external part of tube (as close to
­prepuce as possible) and suture tape to prepuce with
two sutures.
○○ Tape free end of tube to tail.
○○ Attach extension set to urinary catheter and place
sterile collection bag on the other end of the
­extension set.
•• Place e-collar before the patient awakens.

Environmental enrichment

Figure 12.60 Algorithm for treating obstructed cats.

FIC may actually be a clinical manifestation of a physiologically inappropriate response to stress. This is similar
to the colitis that some dogs experience when subjected
to a stressful event such as boarding. As such, it is important to look for possible stressors in the cat’s environment
and ways to reduce them. FLUTD surveys that require
the owner to answer questions about the home environment have been developed. These surveys are helpful in

extracting information from the owner in a systematic
and concise way, which may be difficult in a time limited
clinic interaction (Figure 12.62).
In multi-cat households, the ‘cats +1’ rule should be
applied to all shared resources. If there are two cats in
the household, there should be three litter boxes, three

K22463_C012.indd 489

25/04/16 11:10 pm

490

Diseases of specific organ systems

12.61
a

b
Figures 12.61a, b Examples of a tomcat catheter (a) and a
Slippery Sam™ catheter (b).

food bowls, three water bowls, three scratching posts, etc.
Litter boxes should be kept very clean and away from
other pets. Having a dog interrupting private time in the
box or rummage through the litter looking for ‘treats’
can be very stressful. Water bowls need to be kept clean
and filled. Some cats seem reluctant to drink if their
­whiskers can touch the sides of the bowl; therefore, an
extra wide drinking bowl may be helpful. As with litter
boxes, bowls should be out of the reach of curious children and ­hungry dogs. Cats seem to prefer surveying the
environment from elevated vantage points. This gives

12.62

Household Resource Checklist

The following questions ask about your cat’s resources so we can learn more about the environment your cat(s) live in.
Please ✓ DK if you don’t know, NA if it does not apply, or Yes or No after each question. If you have more than one cat, please
answer for all cats. Resources (food, water, litter, and resting areas) for each cat are assumed to be out of (cat) sight of each
other, such as around a corner or in another room. If they are in sight of each other, please answer No.
Space

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Each cat has its own resting area in a convenient location that provides some
privacy.
Resting areas are located such that another animal cannot sneak up on the cat
while it rests.
Resting areas are located away from appliances or air ducts that could come on
unexpectedly (machinery) while the cat rests.
Perches are provided so each cat can look down on its surroundings.
Each cat can move about freely, explore, climb, stretch, and play if it chooses to.
Each cat has the opportunity to move to a warmer or cooler area if it chooses to.
A radio or TV is left playing when the cat is home alone.

DK

NA

Yes

No





































































































Food and water

8
9

Each cat has its own food bowl.
Each cat has its own water bowl
Bowls are located in a convenient location to provide privacy while the cat eats
10
or drinks.
Bowls are located such that other animals cannot sneak up on the cat while it
11
eats or drinks
12 Bowls are washed regularly (at least weekly) with a mild detergent.
13 Bowls are located away from machinery.

Litter boxes

14 Each cat has its own box (one box per cat, plus 1).
Boxes are located in convenient, well-ventilated locations that still give each
15
cat some privacy while using it.

K22463_C012.indd 490

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

16 Boxes are located on more than one level in multi-level houses.
17 Boxes are located so another animal cannot sneak up on the cat during use.
Boxes are located away from machinery that could come on unexpectedly
18
during use.
19 The litter is scooped daily.
20 The litter is completely replaced weekly.
Boxes are washed regularly (at least monthly) with a mild detergent (like
21
­dishwashing liquid), rather than strongly scented cleaners.
22 Unscented clumping litter is used.
23 A different brand or type of litter is purchased infrequently (less than monthly).
If a different type of litter is provided, it is put in a separate box so the cat can
24
choose to use it (or not) if it wants to
Social contact
Each cat has the opportunity to play with other animals or the owner if it
25
chooses to on a daily basis.
26 Each cat has the option to disengage from other animals or people in the
­household at all times.
27 Do any cats interact with outdoor cats through windows?
Body care and activity
28 Horizontal scratching posts are provided.
29 Vertical scratching posts are provided.
31 Chew items (e.g. cat-safe grasses) are provided.
32 Toys to chase that mimic quickly moving prey are provided.
33 Toys that can be picked up, carried, and tossed in the air are provided.
34 Toys are rotated on a regular basis (at least weekly) to provide novelty.

491

















































































































If you have additional comments on any of the questions, please write them below, including the question #.
Please help us understand what your cat does around the house by placing a check (✓) in the box next
to each behavior that best describes how commonly your cat does each of the behaviors described below.
Does your cat
Leave household articles (furniture,
drapes, clothing, plants, etc.) alone.
Eat small amounts calmly at intervals
throughout the day.
Drink small amounts calmly at intervals
throughout the day.
Use the litterbox.

K22463_C012.indd 491

A little
All Most A good
Some of
bit of
of the of the bit of
the time
the time
time time the time

None
of the
time

Does
not
apply

























































25/04/16 11:10 pm

492

Diseases of specific organ systems

Get along with people in the home.
Get along with other pets in the home.
Remain calm when left alone.
Stay relaxed during normal, everyday
handling (grooming, petting).
Calm down quickly if startled or excited.
React calmly to everyday events
­(telephone or doorbell ringing).
Play well with people.
Play well with other family cats.
Show affection without acting clingy or
annoying.
Tolerate confinement in a carrier ­(including
travel).
Groom entire body calmly.
Use scratching posts.
Play with toys.




















































































































































Comments: anything else your cat regularly does or does not do that you think might be helpful for us
to know about?
Figure 12.62 Example of a Household Resource questionnaire that can be used to collect information about the pet’s environment.
(Courtesy C.A. Buffington)

cats a place where they can feel safe cat-napping. Cat
hammocks and window perches can provide them with
the necessary comfort. When there is conflict between
pets, steps must be taken to mitigate adverse interactions,
even if it requires physical separation of the pets. Toys
that encourage interaction between owners and their
pets should be encouraged.

Diet
The role of diet in controlling FIC is somewhat controversial. Although many feline diets have been acidified and,
in some cases, magnesium restricted ‘for urinary tract
health’, there is no proven benefit of this practice. Struvite
crystals do not damage normal urinary tract epithelium
and their presence does not appear to be the cause of FIC.
Nevertheless, the feeding of canned moist diet has been
shown to lower the incidence and recurrence of FIC. It is
important, however, not to ‘switch’ diets, especially in cats
accustomed to a dry kibble food. The stress associated with
an abrupt diet change has the potential to trigger further
episodes of cystitis or, worse, anorexia and hepatic lipidosis. Rather, the new diet should be offered alongside the
cat’s usual food, and the pet should be allowed to choose

K22463_C012.indd 492

between them. Most cats will eventually choose the wet
food. If the cat will only eat dry food, a change should not
be instituted.
While it is clear that ingestion of a wet food diet
decreases urine osmolality and, therefore, concentration
of noxious substances, other factors may be involved. The
feeding of a wet food involves a different type of interaction between the owner and pet. Bowls need to be washed,
cans opened, food scooped and prepared and, finally, the
cat is presented with its meal. This can be contrasted
with scooping and ‘dumping’ of a dry kibble. Whether it
is the moisture content of the food, the ritual involved,
or both, the feeding of a wet food diet should be encouraged. A recent study suggests that a specific diet (Hill’s®
c/d® Multicare), which is high in omega-3 fatty acids, may
decrease recurrence of FLUTD.
The eating environment should be analyzed for potential stress. Many cats prefer to eat alone where they will
not be disturbed by other animals, sudden movement, or
unexpected noises. Other cats seem to be more social and
may enjoy human companionship during their meals.
The goal is to minimize stress and maximize the pleasure
of the dining experience.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

Pheromones
Pheromones are chemical messengers that convey information between members of the same species. Cats
release several pheromones from facial scent glands, and
they deposit these pheromones by rubbing their heads on
objects, including their human companions, when they feel
safe. A synthetic analog (Feliway®, Ceva Santé Animale)
is available as both a room diffuser and spray. The proposed effect of this product is to decrease a
­ nxiety-related
behavior. While studies examining the use of this product in cats with FIC are lacking, there is evidence that this
product may decrease marking and scratching behavior
in multi-cat households, as well as increase grooming and
eating in hospitalized patients. It has been suggested that
the spray can be applied to the area in which the cat is
inappropriately urinating or that an entire room can be
treated with a plug-in diffuser.

493

provide analgesia both peripherally and in the CNS, it has
been shown to be a potent relaxer of urethral tissue. The
recommended dosage is 1 mg/kg PO q24h.
Prazosin (0.5mg/cat PO q24h) is an alpha-blocker that
may decrease urethral spasms. There is some empirical
evidence to support its use.

Other
While the exact cause of FLUTD is unknown, a ­multifaceted
approach combining environmental enrichment, diet,
pheromones, and drugs appears to give many patients
relief. In cases in which symptoms cannot be controlled,
a perineal urethrostomy may be required. Because of the
risk of incontinence, the required anatomic modification,
and high lifelong risk of infection, this should only be
­considered when other possible alternatives have been
exhausted.

UROLITHIASIS

Drugs
Amitriptyline is a tricyclic antidepressant drug with
anti-anxiety, analgesic, and anti-inflammatory properties. Although some small studies have shown no benefit
from the use of amitriptyline for the treatment of FLUTD,
one large study in 2003 found a significant benefit from
its use. Not only does amitriptyline decrease anxiety and

Definition/overview
The most common uroliths in dogs and cats are composed
of struvite and calcium oxalate, while uroliths composed of ammonium urate and cystine are less common
(Tables 12.19, 12.20).

Table 12.19 Uroliths in dogs.
Struvite

Calcium oxalate

Urate

Cystine

Age

2–9 years*

5–12 years

1–5 years

1–7 years

Breed

Min. Schnauzer, Min.
Poodle, Bichon Frise,
Cocker Spaniel

Min. Schnauzer, Std.
Schnauzer, Lhaso Apso,
Yorkshire Terrier, Min.
Poodle, Shi Tzu, Bichon Frise

Dalmatian, English
Bulldog, Min.
Schnauzer, Yorkshire
Terrier, Shi Tzu

English Bulldog,
Dachshund,
Bassett Hound,
Newfoundland

>5 years**

>6 years**

Majority

≤7.0
Calcium oxalate

≤7.0
Urate

≤7.0
Cystine

↑ Ca2+†

↓ Albumin††
↓ BUN (urea)†

Sex:
Female
Male

>80%

Urinalysis:
PH
Crystals
Culture
Serum

≥7.0
Struvite
Staph. intermedius

Radiography

Large, >2 cm
smooth surface

Medium size
spiked surface

Small rounded

Small rounded

Opacity

2+–4+

4+

0–2+

1+–2+

* If less than 1 year old, very high chance of struvite.
** Higher probability if in this age category.
†
Only rarely found.
††
In portosystemic shunts.

K22463_C012.indd 493

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Diseases of specific organ systems

Etiology
Urine is a complex solution made up of dissolved
­substances, some of which have a tendency to precipitate out of solution while others actively inhibit precipitation by increasing solubility. For example, as the
­concentration of calcium in urine increases, there is an
increased risk of it binding to oxalate and forming crystals and stones; however, citrate, which is also present
in urine, binds to calcium and makes it unavailable for
binding. In Figure 12.63, there is a region on the chart
called the solubility ­product. If urine were only made
up of substances that have a tendency to precipitate out
of ­solution, this would be the maximum saturation that
could be achieved. However, the presence of substances
that actively inhibit precipitation allows urine to achieve
a metastable ­supersaturation state. Under normal circumstances, there is a balance between precipitators
and inhibitors and urine exists in this metastable state;
however, in the presence of an excess of precipitators or
Table 12.20 Uroliths in cats.

Struvite

Calcium
oxalate

Age:*
1–4 years
>10 years

79%
60%

21%
40%

Breed

Any

Burmese,
Himalayan,
Persian

Sex:
Male
Female

65%
75%

35%
25%

Urinalysis:
PH
Crystals
Culture

≥7.0
Struvite

Urate

The second most common canine urolith is calcium oxalate. The formation of these stones can be the result of
excessive calcium/oxalate excretion or an absence of
urolith inhibitors. Although most cases are idiopathic,
possible causes of excessive calcium excretion into urine
should be investigated. Increased calcium excretion can

2++†

Kf (Formation
Product)

≤7.0
Ammonium
urate

↓ Albumin
↓ BUN

††

Radiograph

Discoid‡
Ovoid/
smooth‡‡

Spiked
surface

Rounded

Opacity

2+–4+

4+

0–2+

* If less than 1 year old, usually due to urease-producing
infection.
†
Only rarely found.
††
In portosystemic shunts.
‡
Usually sterile.
‡‡
Associated with urease-producing infection.

K22463_C012.indd 494

In dogs, the most common urolith is struvite ­(magnesium
ammonium phosphate). These stones, once called t­riple
phosphate, are associated with urease-producing bacteria (Staphylococcus intermedius, Proteus mirabilis,
Pseudomonas spp., Klebsiella spp.). Urea is plentiful in the
urine and urease splits it to form ammonium and bicarbonate (Figure 12.64). Ammonium combines with magnesium and phosphate while the bicarbonate raises the
urine pH. The change in pH decreases the solubility of the
ammonium–magnesium–phosphate complex, leading to
the formation of struvite crystals and stones. The anatomic configuration of the female makes urease-producing
infections more common than in males.
In contrast to those in dogs and people, struvite uroliths
found in young healthy cats are usually not associated
with UTIs. Although the exact pathophysiology is not well
understood, diet, breed, sex, and urine pH all seem to play
a role.

12.63

≤7.0
Calcium
oxalate

↑ Ca

Pathophysiology
Struvite

Calcium oxalate

Rare

Staph.
intermedius

Serum

a shortage of inhibitors, crystals and uroliths can form.
In some cases, urine pH can also directly impact the
­solubility of these solutes.

Concentration

494

Metastable
supersaturation

Inhibitors ineffective
Nucleation occurs

Inhibitors prevent
crystallization

Ksp (Solubility
Product)
Undersaturated

Dissolution

Figure 12.63 Factors that increase urine concentration above
the supersaturation point or decrease the formation product
(e.g. loss of precipitation inhibitors) will lead to crystal and
stone formation.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

12.64

Urea

Urease

NH+4

Combines W/
Mg ++ & PO4 3-

HCO-3

- Increases pH
- Decreases
solubility

Figure 12.64 Bacterial urease splits urea, which is plentiful
in urine, to form ammonium and bicarbonate. Ammonium
combines with magnesium and phosphate while the
bicarbonate raises the urine pH. The change in pH decreases
the solubility of the ammonium–magnesium–phosphate
complex, leading to the formation of struvite crystals and
stones.

be the result of kidney leakage (failure to reabsorb), or
excessive renal excretion due to elevated blood levels.
Elevated blood levels can be secondary to abnormal intestinal absorption, hyperparathyroidism, paraneoplastic
syndromes, granulomatous disease, or calcitriol toxicosis.
Although excessive loss of oxalate into the urine (hyperoxaluria) plays a role in urolith formation in people, it is
not believed to be important in dogs. In addition, while it
was once thought that urine pH had a great effect on calcium oxalate formation, it is now generally accepted that
urine acidity plays only a minor role.
Serum calcium levels should be measured in all
patients who present with calcium oxalate uroliths or
crystals. This information, when combined with calcitriol, PTH, and PTH-related peptide (PTHrP), can be
helpful in determining the underlying cause of calcium
oxalate formation (Table 12.21). For example, dogs with
excessive intestinal calcium absorption have mildly
increased serum calcium, which suppresses the release
of PTH. In the kidney, increased amounts of calcium are
passed through the glomerulus; however, the absence of
PTH prevents tubular reabsorption. This results in hypercalciuria and stone formation. Dogs with this condition
will often have calcium levels still within the upper
limits of ­‘normal range’ with suppression of both PTH
and calcitriol. Since no tumor is involved, PTHrP will be
undetectable.

K22463_C012.indd 495

495

Calcium oxalate uroliths have been reported in dogs secondary to hyperparathyroidism. In these patients, excessive PTH results in osteoclastic reclamation of bone and
excessive formation of calcitriol ­(1,25-hydroxyvitamin D)
by the kidney. Calcitriol increases intestinal absorption of
calcium. These two actions result in elevations in blood
calcium levels. In the kidney, excessive amounts of calcium are passed through the glomerulus. Although PTH
simulates renal calcium reabsorption, the filtered amount
overwhelms the kidney’s capacity, resulting in hypercalciuria and stone formation.
Although uroliths have been reported secondary to
paraneoplastic hypercalcemia in people, it is not clear if
this occurs in dogs. In these patients, PTHrP, a PTH analog that is produced by the tumor, is elevated and stimulates osteoclastic reclamation of bone. In addition, PTHrP
stimulates conversion of calcidiol to calcitriol. The resulting elevation in serum calcium levels overwhelms the
­kidney’s resorptive abilities, resulting in hypercalciuria.
Leakage hypercalciuria is a failure of the renal tubules
to resorb filtered calcium despite the presence of adequate
PTH. As calcium is lost, PTH is released from the parathyroid gland, mobilizing calcium from bone and stimulating the conversion of calcidiol to calcitriol. Although large
amounts of calcium can be lost into the urine, serum levels are normal due to the actions of PTH and calcitriol. For
reasons that are not entirely clear, hyperadrenocorticism
(Cushing’s disease) can promote tubular calcium loss.
Although many cases of feline calcium oxalate uroliths
are idiopathic, all patients should be screened for idiopathic hypercalcemia, malignancy hypercalcemia, and
primary hyperparathyroidism. Since increases in total
calcium can be unimpressive with some of these conditions, ionized calcium should be measured in all feline
patients with calcium oxalate crystals and/or uroliths. If
high, PTH and PTHrP levels should be measured. Based
Table 12.21 Causes of canine hypercalcemia can often be
determined by measuring calcium, parathyroid hormone (PTH),
calcitriol, and parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP).
Ca++

PTH

Calcitriol

PTHrP

Intestinal

E

L

L

O

Leakage

N

N

N

O

Hyperparathyroid

E

E

E

O

Paraneoplastic

E

L

E

E

Granulomatous

E

L

E

O

Calcipotriol

E

L

E

O

E, elevated; L, low; N, normal; O, zero.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

496

Diseases of specific organ systems

on these three parameters, the likely cause of the hypercalcemia can be determined (Table 12.22).
Cats with idiopathic hypercalcemia may have only
slight elevations in total calcium, while ionized calcium can be dramatically affected. While at least half of
affected cats will have no clinical signs, others will experience weight loss, anorexia, and/or oxalate stones. Besides
removing the calcium oxalate stones, these patients
should be fed a high-fiber alkaline urine ­forming diet.
Many will respond to high dose prednisone (10 mg/cat
q24h), others may require a bisphosphonate such as alendronate (10 mg/cat q7days).

Cystine
In the USA, cystine urolithiasis is uncommon and
accounts for only 1–2% of all uroliths; the incidence may
be higher in parts of Europe. While cystine uroliths have
been reported in many breeds of dogs, Newfoundlands,
Table 12.22 Causes of feline hypercalcemia can often be
determined by measuring ionized calcium, parathyroid
hormone, and parathyroid hormone-related peptide. Since
idiopathic hypercalcemia can present with only slightly
increased total calcium, it is recommended that ionized calcium
be used for screening.
Ionized
Ca++

PTH

PTHrP

Idiopathic

High

Normal/high

O

Cancer

High

Low

High

Primary

High

High

O

Urate
Urate stones are the third most common urolith in dogs
and account for 8% of canine urinary calculi. A genetic predisposition (autosomal recessive) has been ­documented
in Dalmatians and is suspected in English Bulldogs.
Urate stone formation has also been associated with
hepatic ­
dysfunction, especially hepatic portal shunts.
Interestingly, a significant number of dogs that are not
Dalmatians or English Bulldogs and have no evidence
of liver disease develop urate uroliths. While the mechanism of urate stone formation in these dogs is unclear,
Yorkshire Terriers, Shih Tzus, and Miniature Schnauzers
appear to be overrepresented.
In most dogs, dietary purines are metabolized in a series
of steps to the highly soluble allantoin (Figure 12.65). This
process, which takes place in the liver, involves ­converting
purines to hypoxanthine. Through the action of xanthine
oxidase, hypoxanthine is ­
converted to ­
xanthine and
then uric acid. Uric acid, which is poorly soluble, is then
converted to the highly soluble allantoin through the
­
enzymatic action of uricase.
Although Dalmatians possess all the necessary
enzymes to convert purines to allantoin, it appears that
a defective cell membrane transport system decreases
hepatic metabolism of uric acid and large amounts of
uric acid are then presented to the kidney. The ­resulting
hyperuricosuria may not completely explain the ­urolith
formation, as not all Dalmatians with increased urate
excretion are affected. It is likely that other factors
including urine pH and a decrease in the production of
crystallization ­inhibitors play a role. The fact that most
Dalmatians that present for urate stones are male is
­probably due to anatomic differences (e.g. decreased urethral ­diameter) between the sexes.
Urate uroliths have been observed in cats. There does
not appear to be a breed predilection. Most urate uroliths
occur in younger cats and may be secondary to liver disease or portal vascular anomaly; however, many appear
to be idiopathic.

K22463_C012.indd 496

12.65

Purines

Hypoxanthine

Xanthine

Xanthine
oxidase

Uric acid

Uricase

Allantoin

Figure 12.65 Dietary purines are metabolized in a series of
oxidative steps to the highly water soluble allantoin. In some
patients, the process is interrupted, leaving large amounts of
the poorly soluble uric acid.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

Pit Bull Terriers, Dachshunds, and Chihuahuas appear to
be overrepresented.
In the kidney, cystine is freely filtered by the glomerulus and then reabsorbed in the PCT. In affected dogs, there
is a defect in the proteins needed for cystine reabsorption
and excessive amounts of the poorly soluble amino acid
are excreted in the urine. In Newfoundlands, the condition is inherited as an autosomal recessive condition;
however, this has not been demonstrated in other breeds.
There is now a genetic test specifically for Newfoundlands
(University of Pennsylvania).

497

ureter represent a surgical emergency because in a matter
of days they can lead to hydronephrosis and irreversible
kidney damage. Traditionally, these have been surgically
removed; ­however, today, options such as ureteral stents
(Figure 12.71) and subcutaneous ureteral bypass devices
have become possible.
Struvite, urate, and cystine uroliths are all amenable to being dissolved (Figure 12.72); however, in male
patients, this is associated with a high risk of urethral
obstruction. Removal of tiny stones can be attempted
12.66

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs vary with the location of the uroliths.
Nephroliths may cause sublumbar pain and hematuria but they often cause no clinical signs. Bladder
­uroliths cause signs of lower urinary tract inflammation
with ­
hematuria, pollakiuria, and stranguria. Urethral
­uroliths in male dogs cause stranguria and intermittent
­incontinence with a full bladder. They can cause complete
urethral obstruction in both dogs and cats.

Differential diagnosis
Lower urinary tract inflammation (hematuria and
­proteinuria), trauma, neoplasia, UTI, idiopathic cystitis
(cats).

Diagnosis
Presence, number, size, and location of uroliths are
­usually determined by radiographic and/or ultrasound
examination (Tables 12.19, 12.20). As size and radiolucency can vary substantially, ultrasound has proved to be
more diagnostically useful than radiographs.
The likely mineral composition of uroliths can be
predicted on the basis of clinical data including the age,
breed, and sex, and the radiographic density and shape of
the uroliths (Figure 12.66a, b), the mineral composition
of crystals in the urine sediment (Figures 12.67–12.70),
urine pH, and bacterial culture of the urine; however,
actual mineral composition can only be determined by
quantitative analysis of recovered uroliths. These tests,
which include optical crystallography, x-ray ­diffraction,
and infrared spectroscopy, are only performed at
­specialty laboratories.

Management
Uroliths can be treated in several different ways
­depending on their location in the urinary tract. Stones
located in the kidney are usually left untreated unless
they obstruct the ureter, at which point they would be
­surgically managed. Stones that become lodged in the

K22463_C012.indd 497

a

b
Figures 12.66a, b Although struvite uroliths are classically
described as being large with flattened edges between the
stones (a), they can appear as many small stones (b), making
predicting the composition of the uroliths based on clinical
data challenging. In addition, uroliths of a mixed composition
are not uncommon; therefore, whenever possible, uroliths
should be submitted for analysis.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

498

Diseases of specific organ systems

12.67

12.68

12.69

12.70

Figures 12.67–12.70 Appearance of crystals in urine corresponding to the common uroliths (arrows): (12.67) struvite; (12.68)
calcium oxalate dihydrate; (12.69) ammonium urate; (12.70) cystine. (Courtesy D.F. Senior)

12.68

Figure 12.71 Example of a ureteral stent in a patient with
ureteral obstruction. (Courtesy M. Ellison)

with catheter-assisted retrieval. Small stones may be
removed with urohydropropulsion or an endoscope utilizing a stone basket (Figure 12.73). Larger stones can
be removed via surgery or fragmented and removed
by lithotripsy. Once removed, all stones should be
submitted for analysis. While diagnostic imaging and
urine analysis can provide information about the likely

K22463_C012.indd 498

12.72
Preliminary: Urine obtained by cystocentesis submitted
for culture and sensitivity.
Initiate therapy: Start oral antimicrobial drugs based
on urine culture and sensitivity results and begin
­feeding commercially available struvite dissolving diet.
Antimicrobial therapy must continue for duration of
­dissolution therapy.
Every 30 days: Physical examination, urinalysis, ­abdominal
radiographs. If pH is >7.0, suspect resistant ­infection
and submit urine for culture and sensitivity. Adjust
­antimicrobial as indicated.
Continue protocol: Continue therapy for 30 days after the
first follow-up radiographic examination that shows no
evidence of uroliths.
Figure 12.72 Canine struvite uroliths dissolution flowchart.

composition of the stone (Tables 12.19 and 12.20; see
Figures 12.67–12.70), only a proper stone analysis
can provide ­
definitive information regarding stone
composition.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

Canine struvite uroliths
Struvite uroliths can be dissolved over time; however,
this carries the risk of urethral obstruction. In males,
the long narrow urethra and the potential for stones to
become lodged in the area of the os penis makes this is
especially concerning. A discussion with the owner about
the relative risks and benefits of medical and surgical
management should occur before deciding on a therapy.
The owner should be made aware that in dogs, the dissolving process takes many months.
Dissolution of struvite uroliths involves a combination
of antimicrobial and dietary therapy (see Figure 12.72).
Appropriate antimicrobial selection can only be made
on the basis of a urine culture and sensitivity. The urine
must be obtained by cystocentesis and examined in a
timely fashion. Since bacteria are often sequestered and
protected in the layers of the stone, a
­ ntibiotic therapy
must be ­
continued throughout the entire ­
dissolution
process. There are several ­
commercially available
­struvite-dissolving diets. These diets tend to be low in
protein and acidify the urine. Every month, the patient’s
progress should be evaluated by performing a
­ bdominal
radiography and a urine analysis. If the pH is >7.0, a
­resistant UTI should be suspected and a urine ­sample,
obtained by cystocentesis, submitted for culture.
Inhibition of struvite formation requires prevention
of alkaline urine; therefore, the urinary tract must be
free of infections. At-home monitoring can be performed
by measuring urine pH on a regular basis. This can be
accomplished using urine dipsticks or with an inexpensive pH meter. The presence of alkaline urine indicates

499

that a urine culture is necessary. Dogs with recurrent UTIs
despite the resolution of uroliths should be evaluated for
structural abnormalities that may predispose the patient
to UTI. The author has found that most of these cases are
related to an involuted vulva (Figures 12.74a, b). Some
patients benefit from long-term, low-dose antibiotic
12.74

a

12.73

b
Figure 12.73 Urolith removed with a urethroscope and
retrieval basket.

K22463_C012.indd 499

Figures 12.74a, b Dog with an involuted vulva. Note how the
extent of the involution is not apparent until a complete genital
examination is performed.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

500

Diseases of specific organ systems

therapy: ampicillin (10 mg/kg PO q24h) or amoxicillin
(5 mg/kg PO q24h) administered at bedtime.

Feline struvite uroliths
Sterile struvite uroliths can be dissolved by feeding a diet
that is both restricted in magnesium, phosphorus, and
protein and induces aciduria. There are several commercial diets formulated to accomplish struvite dissolution
is cats; however, male cats may be at risk of obstruction.
Compared with dogs, in which the process can take many
months, complete dissolution of stones can be often
accomplished in days to weeks.

Canine calcium oxalate
Calcium oxalate uroliths cannot be dissolved and must be
removed using urohydropropulsion, a stone basket (see
Figure 12.73), surgery, or lithotripsy.
Dogs with elevations in blood calcium levels should be
treated appropriately for any underlying condition. One
of the most important steps in preventing calcium o
­ xalate
crystals and uroliths in otherwise healthy dogs is to
increase water intake, which can be partially accomplished
by feeding a canned diet. The optimum diet composition
to prevent calcium oxalate urolith formation is unknown.
Previously, it had been recommended that diets be low in
protein and sodium restricted; however, recent epidemiologic studies have challenged this approach. Currently
recommended diets include Royal Canin S/O, Hill’s u/d,
and Hills w/d. Despite appropriate diet therapy, as many
as 50% of dogs will have recurrence within 3 years.
The owner should purchase a refractometer and urine
dipsticks. Urine should be checked regularly (at least
weekly) to be certain the USG remains <1.020 and pH is
7.0–7.5. Radiographs should be taken every 2–4 months
so that stones can be detected while they are small
enough to be removed by stone basket, catheter-assisted
retrieval, or urohydropropulsion.
Thiazide diuretics have been shown to decrease
­urinary calcium excretion and should be considered in
dogs with persistent calcium oxalate crystalluria or recurrence of uroliths despite appropriate diet therapy (hydrochlorothiazide, 2 mg/kg PO q12h). Citrate is a urolith
inhibitor that is thought to form complexes with calcium
and increases its solubility. In people, oral potassium
citrate ingestion increases urine pH and increases the
amount of citrate in the urine; however, supplementation
in dogs does not result in a significant change in urine
citrate concentration. Therefore, the benefit of potassium
citrate supplementation is not clear. Nevertheless, some
experts recommend potassium citrate supplementation
(25–50 mg/kg PO q12h).

K22463_C012.indd 500

Feline calcium oxalate
Cats with elevations in ionized calcium should be treated
appropriately for any underlying condition. Once the
hypercalcemia is addressed the amount of calcium
spilling into the urine will abate and they should not
continue to form uroliths. For patients with idiopathic
calcium o
­ xalate uroliths, there are two diets that are formulated for the prevention of these stones. These diets
contain potassium citrate (as an alkalinizing agent and
as a source of citrate) and induce a urine pH of approximately 7.0. Neither has been evaluated in actual calcium
oxalate-forming cats; nevertheless, cats consuming c/d
multicare (Hill’s Pet Nutrition) and S/O (Royal Canin) do
demonstrate a decreased urine calcium oxalate saturation.

Urate
Although urate uroliths in dogs that do not have liver
disease can be medically dissolved, there is a risk of urethral obstruction in male dogs. A discussion with the
owner about the relative risks and benefits of medical
and ­surgical management should occur before selecting
a therapy. Dissolution should not be attempted in dogs
with known liver disease.
The dissolution of urate uroliths involves dietary
changes, medical intervention, and urine modification.
Reduction of urate excretion can be achieved by restricting total protein and by offering low purine content proteins (e.g. eggs) instead of high purine content proteins
(e.g. fish). Feeding a protein-restricted diet can dilute urine
by decreasing the urea available for the medullary concentration gradient of the kidney. Feeding a canned diet in
order to increase water intake can further dilute urine.
Allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, prevents
the conversion of soluble xanthine to the insoluble uric
acid (see Figure 12.65). Although a variety of adverse
reactions have been reported in humans, the most commonly reported adverse effect in dogs is the formation
of xanthine uroliths. This is usually seen when protein
intake is not properly restricted. Prevention of urate
urolith recurrence is best accomplished through a combination of low-protein diets and urine alkalinization.
Prophylactic treatment with allopurinol is not recommended as it may promote the formation of xanthine
uroliths. Urate urolith formation is inhibited in alkaline
urine as the ­concentration of ammonium ions needed for
stone formation decreases. The target pH range is 7.0–7.4.
­Low-protein diets favor an alkaline pH; however, sometimes further urine alkalinization is needed. Potassium
citrate (40–90 mg/kg PO q12h) can be given. A urine pH
of 7.5 or higher should be avoided, as this may favor the
formation of calcium phosphate and struvite uroliths.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

Response to ­medical therapy can be evaluated by periodic monitoring of urine pH (7.0–7.4), USG (<1.015), and
serum BUN (<10 mg/dl).

Cystine
Although cystine uroliths can be medically dissolved
(1–3 months), there is a significant risk of urethral
obstruction, as these occur predominantly in male dogs
(98%). A discussion with the owner about the relative
risks and benefits of medical and surgical management
should occur before selecting a therapy.
Dissolution of cystine uroliths involves dietary
changes, medical intervention, and urine modification. Reduction of cystine excretion can be achieved by
restricting total protein. Furthermore, feeding a proteinrestricted diet can dilute urine by decreasing the urea
available for the renal medulla. Increasing urine volume
and thereby further diluting cystine concentration can
be achieved by feeding a canned diet. Thiol-containing
drugs catalyze the conversion of the poorly soluble cystine to more soluble compounds. N-(2-mercaptopropionyl)
glycine (Thiola®) (20 mg/kg PO q12h) can be used for this
purpose. ­
Side-effects, including aggression, myopathy,
proteinuria, anemia, and thrombocytopenia, may limit
its use. Cystine urolith formation is inhibited in alkaline
urine. The target pH range is 7.0–7.4. Low-protein diets
favor an alkaline pH; however, sometimes further urine
alkalinization is needed. Potassium citrate (40–90 mg/kg
PO q12h) can be given. A urine pH of 7.5 or higher should
be avoided, as this may favor the formation of calcium
phosphate and struvite uroliths. Response to medical
therapy can be evaluated by periodic at-home checking
of urine pH (7.0–7.4) and USG (<1.015).

TUMORS OF THE LOWER URINARY TRACT
Definition/overview
Tumors of the lower urinary tract are relatively rare,
representing less than 2% of all canine neoplasms and
an even lower percentage of feline neoplasms. Most are
malignant and the common histologic types include
transitional cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma,
adenocarcinoma, undifferentiated carcinoma, rhabdomysarcoma, and fibroma. In both dogs and cats, transitional cell carcinoma is the most common neoplasm of
the urethra and bladder. Other malignant mesenchymal tumors, lymphoma, and benign masses have been
reported.

K22463_C012.indd 501

501

Etiology
A relationship between dipping dogs with parasiticides
and the use of certain lawn products and the appearance of transitional cell carcinoma has been suggested.
Scottish Terriers have an 18-fold increased risk of
developing transitional cell carcinoma, while Shetland
Sheepdogs and Beagles have a 4-fold increased risk. In
cats, the tumor types are much more varied, with many
different primary cell types involved. As many as 20%
of ­
bladder tumors in cats are benign mesenchymal
masses.

Pathophysiology
Transitional cell carcinomas spread by direct extension
through the wall of the bladder or urethra to adjacent
tissue and to draining lymph nodes. At diagnosis about
40% have undergone metastasis, most commonly to the
local lymph nodes, the lungs, the urethra, and the ventral
lumbar vertebrae. Secondary UTIs are common, a development that can intensify clinical signs.

Clinical presentation
Affected animals present with signs of lower urinary tract
inflammation including pollakiuria, dysuria, stranguria,
and hematuria. Urethral obstruction may be evident in
patients with urethral tumors. On physical examination,
the bladder wall may be thickened and a mass may be
palpable. With urethral tumors in dogs, a portion or all
of the urethra may be thickened on rectal examination.

Differential diagnosis
Abnormal micturition: UTI, urolithiasis, behavioral disturbances, urethral stricture, granulomatous urethritis,
neurologic disorders, cystitis.

Diagnosis
Urinalysis can fail to detect neoplastic cells on microscopic
examination of the urine sediment; cytospin examination of saline flushes of the bladder may be much more
reliable. When the neoplasm is in the urethra, a suction
biopsy can also be obtained for accurate cytologic evaluation (Figure 12.75). This is performed by placing a sidehole catheter in the urethra while using rectal palpation
to guide the catheter tip into the affected area. Suction is
then applied using a syringe so that the catheter adheres
to the urethral wall and abnormal tissue is drawn inside
the lumen of the side-hole. Then the catheter is forcibly
removed while continuing to apply suction. The diagnostic sample is flushed out of the catheter using a syringe
filled with saline.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

502

Diseases of specific organ systems

Plain radiographs are usually unrewarding, but
contrast studies including a retrograde urethrogram
can reveal filling defects and defects in the normally
smooth contrast agent–mucosal interface (Figure 12.76).

12.75

Ultrasound can be supportive. Because of the risk of
spreading the neoplasm into the abdomen, fine needle
aspirates should not be attempted. When avaliable, urethroscopy and cystoscopy are the most rewarding procedures (Figure 12.77). Not only do they allow visual
inspection of the urethra and bladder, they also facilitate
tissue biopsies.

Management

Figure 12.75 Example of simple equipment needed for
effective urethral suction biopsy. The patient is sedated and
a catheter inserted into the urethra using rectal palpation to
guide the catheter tip into the affected area. Suction is applied
using the syringe and the catheter is forcibly removed.

The success of surgical intervention is limited by the late
stage at which the diagnosis of tumors of the lower urinary tract is generally made. Urethral stenting can provide palliative relief of obstructed urethras (Figure 12.78).
The most effective chemotherapeutic agent for dogs with
transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder is piroxicam
(0.3 mg/kg PO q24h). In one study of 34 dogs, 14.7% went
into partial or complete remission; median ­survival was
155 days and 1-year survival rate was 20.6%. Cisplatin
(50 mg/m2 body surface area every 4 weeks for two or
more treatments) provided a partial response in some
patients. Some success has been reported with both
intraoperative and postoperative radiation. Control of
­
concurrent UTI and treatment with an anticholinergic agent such as propantheline (7.5–15 mg PO q8–12h)
to reduce ­bladder spasm can alleviate some of the urge
incontinence ­experienced by affected dogs.

12.76

12.77

Figure 12.76 Example of a retrograde urethrogram in a patient
with urethral obstruction due to transitional cell carcinoma. The
arrow indicates an area of filling defect.

K22463_C012.indd 502

Figures 12.77 Example of a urethra affected by transitional
cell carcinoma as seen during cystoscopy.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

12.78

503

Clinical presentation
Animals with PKD or perirenal pseudocyst develop
extreme bilateral renomegaly with concurrent signs
of CKD. Affected Persian cats can be any age on initial
presentation but in Cairn Terriers and West Highland
White Terriers, affected animals are usually very young.
Solitary renal cysts are most often diagnosed as an incidental finding.

Differential diagnosis
Renomegaly, neoplasia, hydronephrosis, amyloidosis, FIP.

Diagnosis

Figure 12.78 The same patient as in Figure 12.77 after
placement of a urethral stent.

CYSTIC DISEASE
Definition/overview
Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is a bilateral condition
that has been reported in Persian cats, Cairn Terriers, and
West Highland White Terriers. Rare solitary renal cysts
can be seen in dogs and cats. Cats occasionally develop
unilateral or bilateral perirenal pseudocysts.

Etiology
PKD has a genetic basis with autosomal dominant inheritance in Persian cats and autosomal recessive inheritance
in Cairn Terriers and West Highland White Terriers.

Pathophysiology
The precise changes in the nephron wall that lead to PKD
are not known. A weakening of the tubular basement
membrane and support structures could be a possibility.
Hyperplasia of tubular epithelial cells with consequent
occlusion and obstruction of the tubule has also been theorized. A combination of the above factors may be present.
Persian cats can appear normal as kittens and only develop
pronounced renomegaly and renal failure as adults. In the
single report of PKD in Cairn Terriers, the dogs developed
renal failure as very young puppies. The cysts of PKD can
become infected. The cause of perirenal pseudocysts in cats
is unknown and most affected animals present with CKD.

K22463_C012.indd 503

In Persian cats, an ultrasound performed at 16 weeks has
been reported to have a sensitivity of 75% and a specificity of 100%, while an ultrasound performed at 36 weeks
of age has a sensitivity of 91% and a specificity of 100%.
Cairn Terrier PKD is characterized by the presence of
cysts in the liver and kidney, while West Highland White
Terriers develop PKD as puppies.
Once bilateral renomegaly is recognized on physical
examination, ultrasound examination can differentiate
between PKD, solitary cysts, and perirenal pseudocysts. In
PKD the cysts are multiple, of variable size, and throughout the parenchyma of the kidney (Figures 12.79a, b),
whereas in perirenal pseudocysts the renal capsule is
extremely distended, completely surrounding the kidney
with fluid (Figure 12.80).

Management
No specific treatment is available to manage cats with
PKD or perirenal pseudocyst other than support for their
concurrent CKD. Antibiotics to control secondary pyelonephritis may prevent some of the malaise suffered by
cats with PKD.

HYDRONEPHROSIS
Definition/overview
Hydronephrosis is caused by pressure atrophy of renal tissue due to partial or complete urine outflow obstruction.
The renal papilla and renal medulla are affected first.
Hydronephrosis is a relatively uncommon condition that
often goes unrecognized if only one kidney is affected.

Etiology
Hydronephrosis is caused by obstruction to urine flow.
Cancers in the trigone of the bladder, of the ureter,
and in the renal pelvis can all induce hydronephrosis.
Uroliths, ureteroliths, congenital and acquired strictures,
EUs, and misplaced sutures (usually in association with
­ovariohysterectomy) are also reported.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

504

Diseases of specific organ systems

12.79

Pathophysiology
When urine cannot flow freely from the renal ­pelvis,
increased pressure is reflected back up into the
nephron via the collecting duct. The back pressure
­
eventually becomes sufficiently high to stop glomerular filtration both by direct pressure and a reflex
vasomotor action. When partial ureteral obstruction
­
exists, increased hydrostatic pressure in the collecting tubules renders them less s­ensitive to vasopressin
and this, combined with atrophy of the juxtamedullary
­nephrons, causes reduced renal concentrating ­capacity
and increased urine volume. Ultimately, remaining cortical tissue and the renal capsule become
distended.

a

Clinical presentation
Unilateral hydronephrosis is often clinically silent and
signs are induced by the underlying condition causing
the hydronephrosis (e.g. bladder cancer in the trigone
region of the bladder). Acute obstruction can lead
to sensitivity often thought to be ‘back pain’. Partial
obstruction can lead to increased urine volume with
polydipsia. Bilateral partial ureteral obstruction leads to
renal failure.

Differential diagnosis
Renomegaly: neoplasia, amyloidosis, FIP, cystic disease.

b

Diagnosis

Figures 12.79a, b Ultrasonograms of a Persian cat (age
unknown) with polycystic kidney disease. (Courtesy
R. Baumruck)
12.80

An enlarged kidney may be apparent on abdominal palpation or on radiographs. The presence of hydronephrosis can be confirmed on ultrasound (Figure 12.81), but the
12.81

Figure 12.80 Ultrasonographic appearance of the kidney
(arrow) and the surrounding cystic structure in a cat with a
perirenal pseudocyst. (Courtesy AM Grooters; from Compendium
on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian, 1997,
9:1226, with permission.)

K22463_C012.indd 504

Figure 12.81 Middle aged female Shih Tzu with a ureterolith
causing hydronephrosis of the right kidney. (Courtesy R.
Baumruck)

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

cause of obstruction may only become apparent with further imaging studies and exploratory surgery.

Management
Expeditious surgical correction of outflow obstruction is
essential, as significant kidney function can be lost in just
days. Extreme hydronephrosis is managed by surgical
excision of the affected kidney.

RENAL TUMORS
Definition/overview
Primary kidney tumors are rare and account for less
than 2% of all canine cancer. Most are tumors that have
­metastasized from a remote site. The most common histologic types in dogs include renal tubular cell carcinoma,
transitional cell carcinoma, and renal cell papilloma.
Carcinoma, sarcoma, fibroma, hemangiosarcoma, lymphoma, and nephroblastoma have also been reported. In
cats, ­lymphoma is the predominant renal neoplasia.

Etiology
The large renal blood supply results in the kidney being
the site of distant metastases from primary tumors elsewhere in the body.

Pathophysiology
Tumors cause pain, hematuria, hydronephrosis (if they
obstruct urine outflow), and displacement of normal renal
tissue, which can lead to CKD. Early metastasis by the time of
initial presentation is usual. Paraneoplastic ­syndromes
have been described including ­
polycythemia and
hypertrophic osteopathy. In German Shepherd Dogs, a
­
hereditary multifocal renal cystadenocarcinoma is accompanied by cutaneous nodules (dermatofibrosis).

505

palpation. Unilateral tumors do not cause signs of kidney
disease.
In dogs with renal lymphoma, renal involvement can
be diffuse, so both kidneys can be enlarged. Gross hematuria is not common and evidence of the tumor can usually
be detected involving other organs. In cats, lymphoma
usually causes lumpy bilateral renomegaly. In both dogs
and cats, the diffuse bilateral nature of renal lymphoma
generally leads to CKD and renal failure.

Differential diagnosis
Renomegaly: hydronephrosis, amyloidosis, FIP, cystic
disease.

Diagnosis
Radiographs of the abdomen show an irregularly
enlarged kidney and areas of mineralization may be visible. While an IV urogram can be used to find abnormal
blood perfusion or distortion of the collection system,
ultrasonic imaging can readily detect the abnormal tissue (Figure 12.82). Cytologic evaluation of the urine has
proven unreliable, so only a fine needle aspirate or biopsy
of the mass can provide a definitive diagnosis. Chest
radiographs and an abdominal ultrasound should be
taken to rule out metastasis of a renal tumor or a primary
tumor in another organ.

Management
Treatment of discrete renal tumors is by surgical resection
(Figure 12.83). Prognosis is poor because of the late stage
at which these tumors are generally diagnosed; however,
nephroblastoma is less metastatic than other tumors
and nephrectomy can be curative. Usual treatments for
12.82

Clinical presentation
At presentation, affected animals usually exhibit anorexia
and weight loss. Dogs and cats with nonlymphomatous
renal tumors often present with red–brown urine that
appears the same color both at the beginning and at the
end of urination. In addition, pollakiuria, stranguria,
and urgency are not usually observed. Unilateral renal
enlargement and pain may be evident on abdominal

K22463_C012.indd 505

Figure 12.82 Renal mass in the right kidney later confirmed to
be anaplastic carcinoma.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

506

Diseases of specific organ systems

12.83

Table 12.23 Frequency of bacterial isolates from urinary tract
infection in dogs (%).
Microorganism           %
Escherichia coli           26–67
Staphylococcus spp.         11–19
Proteus mirabilis             
3–32
Enterococcus/Streptococcus spp.    3–22
Klebsiella pneumoniae         
2–8
Pseudomonas aeruginosa       2–4
Enterobacter cloacae           
2–6

Clinical presentation
Figure 12.83 Gross specimen showing a unilateral renal
carcinoma following surgical resection. (Courtesy D.F. Senior)

lymphoma are indicated and renal function can show
some improvement if remission is achieved.

URINARY TRACT INFECTION
Definition/overview
UTI is common in dogs, but uncommon in young and
­middle aged cats.

Etiology
Infection of both the upper and lower urinary tract is
almost always the result of bacteria ascending through
the urethra. Direct hematologic spread to the kidneys is
thought to be relatively rare. UTIs develop when bacterial number and virulence are sufficient to overcome host
defenses.

Pathophysiology
The normal healthy urinary tract has a number of defense
mechanisms that prevent bacterial colonization. These
include: a tight sphincter; frequent forceful voiding; a long
urethra; a glycosaminoglycan coating; regular shedding of
epithelial cells; urinary secretion of immunoglobulin; and
high urine osmolality (especially in the cat). When there is
loss of normal defense mechanisms or an overwhelming
inoculation of pathogenic bacteria, the normally sterile
urinary tract can become infected. The resulting inflammation results in the commonly seen clinical signs. Rectal
and genital bacteria are thought to serve as a reservoir for
infection. Although more than 20 different species of bacteria can be found colonizing this area, only seven account
for the vast majority of UTIs (Table 12.23).

K22463_C012.indd 506

Clinical signs are dependent on whether the upper urinary tract, the lower urinary tract, or both, are affected.
Lower UTIs can be completely asymptomatic or have
any combination of pollakiuria, stranguria, dysuria,
hematuria, or urge incontinence. Most of these signs
­
are due to inflammation of the bladder and/or urethra. It is important to note that infections involving
only the lower urinary tract cannot cause polyuria,
which is the result of bacterial lipopolysaccharide inhibition of vasopressin. When the upper urinary tract is
involved, signs consistent with AKI and septicemia may
predominate.
Although a mucopurulent or bloody discharge is sometimes seen at the distal end of the penis or vulva, physical
examination findings in UTI patients with lower urinary
tract involvement are usually unremarkable. Intact male
dogs may exhibit pain on rectal palpation, suggesting
prostatic involvement. Patients with upper UTIs (pyelonephritis) may exhibit signs of back pain.

Differential diagnosis
Lower urinary tract inflammation (hematuria and proteinuria): trauma, neoplasia, urolithiasis, idiopathic
detrusor instability.

Diagnosis
Diagnostic work up for UTI should include a thorough
physical examination, diagnostic imaging, a CBC, serum
chemistry, urine analysis, and culture. While radiographs
are commonly performed, ultrasound has more diagnostic value. Ultrasound is more sensitive and specific for
finding uroliths, discovering structural abnormalities,
and detecting pyelectasia, which supports the diagnosis
of pyelonephritis. Patients with UTIs that are confined
to the lower urinary tract should have no CBC or serum
chemistry abnormalities. White blood cell counts in

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

patients with pyelonephritis can range from normal to
leukocytosis, while serum chemistry analysis can be normal or demonstrate signs of azotemia depending on the
degree of kidney involvement. The presence or absence
of white blood cells on microscopic analysis of urine sediment does not help in the diagnosis of a UTI. The presence
of white blood cells simply suggests inflammation, which
can have many causes. In addition, UTIs can be diagnosed
in animals in which few white blood cells are found in
urine sediment. While the finding of bacteria on urine
microscopic analysis is diagnostic for a UTI, in some cases
the number of bacteria shed into the urine is low enough
to avoid detection.
The cornerstone of diagnosing and treating UTIs is a
urine culture. The fact that more than half of all urine
samples submitted to veterinary diagnostic laboratories fail to grow bacteria suggests that clinical signs are
not specific for UTIs. In addition, widespread antibiotic
resistance makes antimicrobial susceptibility testing
essential.
Urine should be collected aseptically by cystocentesis.
Often, patients with a UTI will experience pollakiuria,
resulting in a small bladder and making cystocentesis
difficult. In these cases, ultrasound can be helpful in sample collection. When cystocentesis is not possible, urine
may be collected by catheterization, although in cats and
female dogs, sedation would be required. Although a midstream urine collection can be attempted, the potential
for sample contamination makes this option the least
desirable.
There are several options for processing collected
samples. The first, and most cost effective, is to plate and
incubate samples ‘in-house’. A calibrated loop is used to
streak urine on blood and MacConkey agar plates, which
are then incubated at 37°C (Figure 12.84). Blood agar will
support the growth of urinary bacterial pathogens, while
MacConkey agar prevents Proteus spp. from swarming.
If after 48 hours no bacterial growth is noted, the plates
can be discarded and the patient assumed to be free of
a UTI; however, if growth occurs, the agar plates are submitted to a commercial laboratory for bacterial identification and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. A second
option is to refrigerate urine for a limited period of time
(e.g. 12 hours) before it is plated at a commercial laboratory. Refrigerating samples has the potential for affecting
colony counts and time between collection and plating
should be minimized. Specialized tubes, designed to protect urine pathogens while refrigerated, are available but
not widely used. Samples should never be left at room

K22463_C012.indd 507

507

12.84

Figure 12.84 Examples of blood agar and blood and
MacConkey agar plates from a patient suspected of having a
urinary tract infection.

temperature, as bacterial count can double in less than
1 hour, amplifying potential contaminates and eventually leading to bacterial death.
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing provides essential information for selecting an appropriate antibiotic t­herapy. Results are often reported as (S)ensitive,
(I)ntermediate, and (R)esistant on the basis of the Kirby–
Bauer disk diffusion technique. With this method, the
­uropathogen that was isolated from the patient’s urine is
grown on a specialized agar plate in which disks impregnated with c­ommonly used antibiotics are placed. The
antibiotics diffuse out from the disks and their ability
to inhibit ­bacterial growth determines the susceptibility
of the bacteria. While this method is quite effective, the
results are based on typical serum concentrations for the
antibiotic being tested. Because many drugs are excreted
into the urine at higher concentrations, some antibiotics
reported as (I)ntermediate may be quite effective in treating UTIs.
In the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) test,
isolates of the patient’s uropathogen are incubated with
different dilutions of an antibiotic. The minimum concentration of the antibiotic that will inhibit the growth
of the bacteria represents the bacteriostatic dose. If the
achievable urine concentration of the antibiotic can be
expected to be four or more times the MIC, then this drug
would be an acceptable choice even if the antimicrobial
susceptibility testing suggests the antibiotic would be
(I)ntermediate (Table 12.24).

Management
UTIs can be divided into two general categories: uncomplicated and complicated. Uncomplicated cases are those
first-time UTIs in which no underlying predisposing

25/04/16 11:10 pm

508

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 12.24 Dose, minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), and
mean urinary concentration (MUC) of antimicrobials used in the
treatment of urinary tract infection in dogs. (Data developed by
GV Ling, University of California.)

Dose

MIC breakpoint
(µg/ml)

MUC (µg/ml)

Amoxicillin

11 mg/kg
PO q8h

50

201 ± 93

Amoxicillin/
clavulanate

11 mg/kg
PO q8h

50

201 ± 93

Ampicillin

25 mg/kg
PO q8h

77

309 ± 55

Cephalexin

25 mg/kg
PO q8h

56

225

Chloramphenicol

33 mg/kg
PO q8h

32

124 ± 40

Enrofloxacin

5 mg/kg
PO q12h

0.5

25

Nitrofurantoin

4 mg/kg
PO q8h

25

100

Penicillin G

36,600
U/kg PO
q8h

74 (U/ml)

294 ± 210
(U/ml)

Penicillin V

26.4 mg/
kg PO
q8h

32

148 ± 98

Sulfisoxazole

11 mg/kg
PO q8h

360

1,466 ± 832

Tetracycline

18 mg/kg
PO q8h

34

138 ± 65

Trimethoprim–
sulfadiazine

13 mg/kg
PO q8h

8/20

26/79

Amikacin

5 mg/kg
SC q18h

85

342 ± 153

Gentamicin

2.2 mg/kg
SC q8h

25

107 ± 33

Kanamycin

5.5 mg/kg
SC q12h

132

530 ± 151

Tobramycin

1 mg/kg
SC q8h

16

66 ± 39

Note: Bacteria with MIC levels above the break-point are
unlikely to be effective. Values assume normal urine concentration; polyuria decreases urine antimicrobial concentration.

K22463_C012.indd 508

condition can be identified. Complicated cases include
those with a predisposing condition, a history of recurrent UTIs, and all intact male dogs. Predisposing conditions include systemic diseases (e.g. renal disease,
hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism), structural abnormalities (e.g. vulvar malformations,
uroliths, tumors), and immunosuppressive medications.
In uncomplicated cases, treatment with amoxicillin,
cephalexin, or trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole can be
started while waiting for the results of susceptibility testing. Antibiotic therapy should be re-evaluated once the
results of antimicrobial susceptibility testing become
available. An effective therapy should be continued for
10–14 days.
In complicated cases, it is important to attempt to
correct any underlying condition. Endocrine disorders such as hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus,
and hyperthyroidism must to be regulated in order for
UTIs to be adequately controlled. A recessed vulva (see
Figures 12.74a, b) is a common malformation that contributes to many UTIs in female dogs. Many female dogs
with recurrent UTIs have a recessed vulva, which allows
for trapping and pooling of urine. Although urine is sterile
when produced, it is a rich medium for bacterial growth.
This allows normal defense mechanisms to be overwhelmed. This problem is easily corrected with surgery.
This is easily corrected with s­ urgery. Immunosuppressive
medications should be reduced to the lowest effect dose.
Repeated courses of antibiotics without correcting the
underlying problem are likely to result in multidrug
resistant infections.
In intact male dogs, UTIs often involve the prostate
and only certain antibiotics can penetrate this organ. If
appropriate antibiotic therapy is not selected, the urinary
tract can be repeatedly reinfected by sheltered bacteria.
Antibiotic selection needs to be guided by the results of
antimicrobial susceptibility testing as well as by considering which drugs are likely to penetrate the prostate.
Macrolides, lincosamides, sulfonamides, chloramphenicol, and fluoroquinolones all seem to be reasonable
choices.
Despite appropriate therapy and a failure to
­diagnosis a predisposing underlying cause, persistent
and r­ ecurrent UTIs occur. One strategy to prevent reinfection is oral administration of methenamine hippurate (500 mg PO q12h [dog]; 250mg PO q12h [cat]).
Methenamine is c­ onverted to formaldehyde in the presence of acidic urine (pH <5.5). Ammonium chloride can
be used to acidify the urine (65 mg/kg PO q8h in dogs;

25/04/16 11:10 pm

Nephrology/urology

20 mg/kg PO q12h in cats). Long-term low-dose antimicrobial treatment can also be used in the treatment of
recurrent UTIs. Patients are given a full course of antimicrobial based on ­sensitivity test results for 3–4 weeks.
Treatment is then continued for at least 6 months by
giving 50% of the regular daily dose at night after the
patient has voided.

K22463_C012.indd 509

509

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Acierno MJ, Labato MA (2011) Kidney diseases and renal replacement therapies. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 41(1).
Bartges J, Polzin DJ (2011) Nephrology and Urology of Small
Animals. Wiley-Blackwell, Ames.
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (2010) Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 7th edn, Vol 2. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.

25/04/16 11:10 pm

This page intentionally left blank

511

Chapter 13
Approach to abdominal radiographs
L. Abbigail Granger

BASICS OF ABDOMINAL RADIOGRAPHY
To properly interpret abdominal radiographs, the basics
of lesion description using the six Roentgen signs (size,
shape, margination, opacity, location, and number) must
be performed in order to reliably research differential diagnoses; the goal is to translate an image to text.
Additionally, the five radiographic opacities must be
known to avoid misinterpretation of findings, such as falciform fat being mistaken for fluid. The five radiographic
opacities in order from most lucent to most opaque are:
air, fat, soft tissue/fluid, bone/mineral, and metal. The
abdomen is primarily composed of soft tissue opaque
structures that are surrounded by fat. Organs are visible
because fat is decreased in opacity when compared with
soft tissue/fluid. It must be understood that soft tissue
and fluid are of identical radiographic opacity, therefore
thickness of gastrointestinal (GI) walls and the urinary
bladder wall cannot be determined on radiographs without the use of contrast.

Technique and positioning
Positioning
An abdominal study should include the entire diaphragm
as the cranial boundary and the coxofemoral joints as
the caudal boundary. The right and left lateral views are
named according to the recumbency of the animal. The
ventrodorsal view is obtained with the animal in dorsal
recumbency and is the primary orthogonal view obtained
in abdominal imaging. A dorsoventral view with the animal positioned in sternal recumbency is rarely obtained.
With each view, the hindlimbs should be extended caudally to limit crowding of abdominal organs.

Choosing the abdominal views
Like any radiographic study, at least two views must be
obtained of the abdomen in order to properly evaluate the
study and reconstruct a 3-D description from a set of 2-D
images. Most commonly, right lateral and ventrodorsal

K22463_C013.indd 511

views are obtained. In the right lateral view, the tail of
the spleen is more commonly visible and the kidneys
are ­
better distinguished as separate structures when
compared with the left lateral view. Gravity, mobility of
organs, and the changes in distribution of gas and fluid
with recumbency can be used to optimize the diagnostic
capability of radiographic studies in many common clinical scenarios. Because of this, many radiologists advocate
the use of right and left lateral views in addition to an
orthogonal view as standard practice for imaging the
­thorax and the abdomen.
The variation in abdominal organ appearance with
recumbency is most notable in the GI tract. Luminal contents within the stomach and small intestine often contain some degree of fluid and gas. Because patients are
positioned in recumbency (rather than standing) and
views are obtained with a vertical beam (rather than horizontal beam), the classic appearance of a combination of
contents in the GI tract is a summation of opacities created by both gas and fluid that changes with positioning
(Figure 13.1). The redistribution of gas within the GI tract
(without administration of additional contrast agents) by
obtaining a left lateral view has been used to diagnose
pyloric outflow obstructions, locate obstructions within
small intestines, highlight intussusceptions, distinguish
colon from dilated small intestine, rule out gastric malpositioning, and definitively locate the pylorus, among
other applications.

Special views
Depending on the clinical circumstances, an additional
view outside the standard protocol may provide vital
diagnostic information. For example, a flexed hindlimb
view of the caudal abdomen can be obtained to evaluate the entire penile urethra for calculi in a male dog
while avoiding superimposition of the femurs. Simple
additional techniques include positional radiography (left lateral abdominal projection and horizontal
beam radiography), compression radiography, and simple negative contrast radiography (pneumocolon and

23/04/16 1:14 pm

512

Diseases of specific organ systems

13.1

Figure 13.1 Diagram showing the distribution of gravity-dependent stomach contents with recumbency. An accompanying
radiographic appearance is shown below each diagram. When the animal is positioned in sternal recumbency (dorsoventral
view), gas tends to rise to the most dorsal part of the stomach, the fundus, and fluid will fall to the most ventral part, the gastric
body. As a result, the gastric fundus is more apparent because luminal gas creates more contrast. In the right lateral view, mobile
fluid falls to the most gravity-dependent part of the stomach, the pylorus, while gas rises to the fundus, the largest gastric
compartment. As a result, the gastric fundus is most visible on right lateral view. On the left lateral recumbent view, gas rises to
the nongravity-dependent pylorus, while fluid falls to the fundus, making the region of the pylorus more radiographically evident.
Finally, when animals are positioned in dorsal recumbency (ventrodorsal view), gas rises to the most ventral part of the stomach,
the gastric body, while fluid falls to the gastric fundus and pylorus. This results in increased visibility of the gastric body.

pneumogastrogram). These views will be addressed in
appropriate sections throughout the chapter.

READING ABDOMINAL RADIOGRAPHS
The reading of abdominal radiographs must be done
systematically. An organ approach can be used to ensure
that each structure is evaluated on each view (Box 13.1).
Evaluating each organ on every study regardless of
clinical signs increases the comfort level in recognizing normal from abnormal structures. The familiarity
gained from a systematic approach will prevent newly
recognized organs or organs better seen in one patient
versus another from being automatically or inappropriately deemed abnormal. Also, many structures within the
abdomen are not seen in normal animals on radiographs.
The location of these structures should be kept in mind
so that when radiographically evident abnormalities do
occur, they will be considered by interpreter.

K22463_C013.indd 512

INTERPRETATION OF ABDOMINAL
ABNORMALITIES
Extra-abdominal structures
Extra-abdominal structures must be reviewed early in
the interpretation process. On some occasions, structures
associated with the abdominal wall can give the false
impression of intra-abdominal abnormalities, such as
wet hair mimicking peritoneal effusion, therefore early
recognition will prevent misinterpretation.

Abdominal wall, skeleton, and visible thorax
Initially, the ventral abdominal wall should be characterized as tucked, pendulous, or normal. This will assist
with differentiating potential causes of decreased detail,
if it exists, and gives an overall clue as to the body habitus of the animal. An animal with a tucked abdominal
contour may have decreased abdominal detail because
of thin body condition, whereas an animal with a pendulous contour and decreased peritoneal detail may have

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

Box 13.1 Systematic evaluation of the abdomen.
•• Extra-abdominal structures:
○○ Abdominal wall, including soft tissues and axial
skeleton
○○ Visible thorax
○○ Visible hindlimbs
•• Peritoneal space:
○○ Peritoneum*
○○ Mesentery, omentum, falciform fat
○○ Mesenteric lymph nodes*
•• Liver:
○○ Gallbladder*
•• Spleen
•• Retroperitoneal space:
○○ Retroperitoneal fat
○○ Medial iliac and other sublumbar lymph nodes*
•• Upper urinary tract:
○○ Kidneys
○○ Ureters*
•• Adrenal glands*
•• Reproductive tract:
○○ Ovary/uterus*
○○ Prostate*
•• Lower urinary tract:
○○ Urinary bladder
○○ Urethra*
•• Gastrointestinal tract:
○○ Stomach
○○ Small intestine
○○ Colon
•• Pancreas*

513

peritoneal effusion or large volumes of peritoneal fat
deposition causing increased scatter. Young animals also
tend to have a pendulous contour and decreased detail.
Abnormalities within the visible thorax and skeleton
may not be responsible for clinical signs, but can assist
with appropriate ranking of differential diagnoses if
intra-abdominal abnormalities are seen.

Peritoneal space
Peritoneal effusion
The influence of fluid within the peritoneal space can
range from a mild decrease in detail to a total border
effacement of abdominal organs (Figures 13.2a, b).
Smaller volumes of peritoneal effusion may cause soft
tissue opaque streaking within the falciform and mesenteric fat, making serosal margins less distinct. In some
cases, fluid is so severe that the only indication of organ
position is the gas within small intestinal loops. An asymmetric distribution of small intestine may indicate mass
effect or may simply be due to an absence of gas-filled
intestine in a particular region. When differentiating
various causes of abdominal effusion, a fluid composition approach is most inclusive. Fluid may be due to
transudates, exudate, hemorrhage, urine, bile, or chyle.
The causes of each fluid type can then be considered as
potential differential diagnoses. Clinical history is also
very useful in differentiating causes of effusion. In many
instances, fluid sampling and subsequent analysis is the
next step when peritoneal effusion is suspected.

*Organs not normally seen radiographically
13.2

a

b

Figures 13.2a, b Lateral abdominal radiographs in a dog with a small volume of peritoneal effusion (a) and a dog with marked
peritoneal effusion (b). In the dog with the smaller volume of peritoneal effusion, soft tissue opaque streaking can be seen within
the ventral abdominal fat (a, between black arrows). The margins of the liver, spleen, intestines, and urinary bladder are somewhat
visible, but are less distinct than in a normal animal. The splenic tail, although it is less distinct, can be recognized as having a
nodular appearance. In this case, the margins of the kidneys remain sharp because they are retroperitoneal in location and effusion
is not concurrently present in the retroperitoneal space (white arrows). In the dog with a large volume of peritoneal effusion (b), the
serosal margins of the peritoneal structures are completely obscured. The only indication of organ location is the distribution of
intestines containing gas. Abdominal ultrasound and/or fluid analysis are the next logical steps in evaluating cases with this volume
of effusion.

K22463_C013.indd 513

23/04/16 1:14 pm

514

Diseases of specific organ systems

Decreased serosal detail (Box 13.2) can include the
entire abdomen or can have a clear regional distribution
indicating disease limited to local organs. Focal or global
regions of decreased detail may also be due to peritonitis,
which appears similar to small volumes of effusion. In such
cases, attempts to sample may be unrewarding and ultrasound is recommended to determine the underlying cause.

Horizontal beam radiography
Abnormalities within the peritoneal space may manifest
as excess lucency rather than increased opacity. Free gas
within the abdomen can highlight serosal margins, making them apparent when they otherwise would not be
visible. Potential causes of free peritoneal gas are listed in
Box 13.3. Additionally, most causes of free peritoneal gas
also cause some degree of abdominal effusion, resulting
in a mixed gray opacity that can be difficult to differentiate from GI contents if care is not taken to avoid misinterpretation. In such cases, horizontal beam ­radiography
can be immensely helpful in confirming suspicion of free
gas; however, suspicion of free gas must be present in
order to consider use of horizontal beam radiographs.
Horizontal beam views of the abdomen can be obtained
by placing the animal in left lateral or dorsal recumbency
(Figures 13.3a–d ). The basis of these views is to force gas

Box 13.2 Potential causes of reduced peritoneal detail.
•• Underexposure
•• Wet air artifact
•• Young animal (typically pendulous contour)
•• Abdominal effusion (pendulous contour)
•• Mass effect (pendulous contour)
•• Obesity (pendulous contour)
•• Emaciation or thin body condition (tucked contour)
•• Peritonitis
•• Carcinomatosis or neoplastic seeding (typically
­pendulous contour)

Box 13.3 Causes of free peritoneal gas.
•• Perforated hollow viscus:
○○ Stomach
○○ Small intestine
○○ Colon
○○ Uterus
○○ Urinary bladder (gas rarely present)
•• Penetrating or perforating injury
○○ Bite wound
○○ Gunshot
•• Ruptured abscess (gas-producing bacteria)
•• Recent abdominal surgery (within about 3 weeks)

13.3

a

b

c

d

Figures 13.3a–d Horizontal beam radiography of the abdomen. Positioning (a) to obtain a horizontal beam radiograph with
the patient in left lateral recumbency; arrow denotes direction of the x-ray beam. Resultant horizontal beam ventrodorsal view
(b) showing free peritoneal gas accumulated caudal to the diaphragm on the right side (arrows). Positioning (c) to obtain horizontal
beam radiograph with the patient in dorsal recumbency; arrow denotes direction of the x-ray beam. Resultant horizontal beam
lateral view (d) showing free peritoneal gas accumulated caudal to the diaphragm, ventrally (arrows).

K22463_C013.indd 514

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

to accumulate in a predictable location (i.e. non-gravity
dependent) and radiograph this location.
Pneumoperitoneum is most often caused by a penetrating/perforating wound or a perforated hollow viscus,
usually the GI tract. Unless the cause of the pneumoperitoneum is iatrogenic (i.e. previous abdominal surgery
within about 3 weeks), the diagnosis of pneumoperitoneum often indicates septic peritonitis and surgical intervention is required.

Compression radiography
The purpose of compression radiography is to isolate
a specific region of interest or remove superimposition of peritoneal structures by use of a radiolucent
compression device. The most typically used device is
a radiolucent wooden spoon or spatula; however, any
rigid radiolucent device with a handle can be used.
The indications for this study include isolation of specific organs of interest that are otherwise obscured by
superimposition or to better delineate margins of a normal or abnormal structure seen on survey radiographs.

515

This technique has been used to better delineate palpable
or r­ adiographically ­visible abdominal masses, isolate the
urinary bladder to prove presence or absence of calculi,
remove superimposition of the GI tract on kidneys, separate small intestines from each other, and confirm the
presence of uterine enlargement, among other potential
applications.
Patient positioning depends on the region of interest to
be evaluated. Often, standard abdominal views are used
to assist in determining the region of interest and positioning for the compression study. Palpation may also
dictate a specific region of interest. The specific location
should be isolated with a hand, then the hand replaced
by the wooden spoon or other compression device. The
device should be similar in size to or 1.5 times larger
than the specific organ or regions of interest being isolated. The act of compressing reduces the thickness in the
region of interest; therefore, the radiographic technique
should be reduced to avoid overexposure (decrease kVp
by 10%). Collimating is advisable to avoid personnel exposure and optimize the image (Figures 13.4a–c).

13.4

a

b

c

Figures 13.4a–c Positioning for obtaining a compression view, and lateral abdominal survey and compression radiographs in an
11-year-old female spayed Domestic Shorthair cat presenting with a year-long history of intermittent vomiting. Typical positioning
for a palpable abdominal mass is shown in (a). A ventrally located soft tissue opacity having an indistinct dorsal margin is seen
on the survey radiograph (b). A lateral radiograph was obtained after using a radiolucent wooden spatula to isolate the mass (c).
The wooden spatula decreases the thickness of tissues in the region of the mass, which results in an increase in overall apparent
exposure in the location of the spatula (c, white arrowheads). The soft tissue opacity is better defined on the compression view
(white arrows). Also, a gas-containing small intestinal loop leads into the mass, which has an irregular tubular gas center
(black arrows) consistent with a small intestinal organ of origin.

K22463_C013.indd 515

23/04/16 1:14 pm

516

Diseases of specific organ systems

Compression should be avoided in cases where r­ upture
is a potential concern, such as a severely enlarged uterus
or splenic mass, or in cases of diaphragmatic hernia
where organs may be further displaced into the pleural
space.

Mass effect
The visibility of serosal margins can be diminished when
organ crowding occurs. Mass effect is the altered distribution of organs within the peritoneal space. A mass is

the object that causes the altered distribution of organs.
The description of mass effect is the biggest clue as to the
most likely organ of origin for an abdominal mass. For
the sake of description of mass effect, the abdomen can be
considered to have defined compartments on the lateral
and ventrodorsal views. Potential organs of origin for visible masses correspond to the location of the mass effect
related to these compartments, as shown in Table 13.1.
Description of the organ displacement is the key to determining the most likely compartment for a mass effect

Table 13.1 Potential organs of origin for masses located in regions of the peritoneal space. Separate regions are
numbered and delineated with black lines.
Lateral view

Location of mass effect

Potential organ of origin

1. Cranioventral

•• Liver
•• Spleen
•• Gastric body and pylorus
•• Right pancreatic limb
•• Gallbladder and biliary system
•• Hepatic and gastric lymph nodes

2. Craniodorsal

•• Liver
•• Splenic head
•• Gastric fundus
•• Kidneys
•• Adrenal glands
•• Ovary
•• Left pancreatic limb
•• Splenic lymph nodes

3. Central

•• Spleen
•• Mesenteric lymph nodes
•• Mesentery
•• Uterus
•• Intestine
•• Ovary
•• Retained testicle
•• Left kidney
(Continued )

K22463_C013.indd 516

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

Location of mass effect

Potential organ of origin

4. Caudoventral

•• Urinary bladder
•• Prostate
•• Uterus
•• Retained testicle

5. Caudodorsal

•• Sublumbar lymph nodes
•• Distal descending colon
•• Ureters

517

Ventrodorsal view

Location of mass effect

Potential organ of origin

1. Right cranial

•• Liver
•• Gallbladder and biliary system
•• Pancreas
•• Right kidney
•• Right adrenal
•• Pylorus and proximal duodenum
•• Gastric and hepatic lymph nodes

2. Left cranial

•• Spleen
•• Liver
•• Gastric fundus
•• Left pancreatic limb
•• Left adrenal

3. Central

•• Spleen
•• Mesenteric lymph nodes
•• Intestine
•• Left kidney
•• Uterus
•• Ovary
•• Retained testicle

4. Caudal

•• Urinary bladder
•• Uterus
•• Prostate
•• Sublumbar lymph nodes
•• Distal descending colon

K22463_C013.indd 517

23/04/16 1:14 pm

518

Diseases of specific organ systems

and, therefore, the most likely organ of origin and the
most likely differential diagnoses for the mass. Location
of the mass effect needs to be considered on orthogonal
views in order to assign the most likely organ of origin.
Keep in mind that a mass effect can be identified without
a well-defined mass being visible; however, displacement
of organs such as the small intestines indicates the presence of an abnormality. Very few differential diagnoses
exist for abdominal masses and they are highlighted in
Box 13.4.

Liver
Hepatic size is a subjective determination based on its
shape and the position of the stomach. The axis of the
stomach is a line drawn from the gastric fundus to the
ventral aspect of the gastric body/pylorus. The gastric
axis should be roughly parallel to the ribs or perpendicular to the spine. When the axis of the stomach is angled
cranially, causes of microhepatia should be considered;
when the axis is angled caudally, causes of hepatomegaly
should be considered. The majority of the liver is within
the confines of the costal arch; however, it can extend
caudal to the arch in normal animals. Increased caudal
extension of the caudoventral liver margin indicates

hepatic enlargement. Additionally, in some cases of
hepatic enlargement, the caudoventral liver margin will
appear rounded, rather than sharp and triangular.

Increased liver size
Hepatomegaly can be categorized as focal, generalized, or nodular. The distinction is important because
differential diagnoses are based on the categorization (Table 13.2). Generalized hepatomegaly will most
often appear as a rounded caudoventral margin with
increased extension beyond the costal arch and caudal
displacement of the gastric axis (Figure 13.5). The pylorus tends to be dorsally displaced and the right kidney is
often caudally displaced. With generalized hepatomegaly, often the right stomach (pylorus) is more caudally
displaced than the left. Severe asymmetric displacement,
however, indicates focal hepatomegaly.
13.5

Box 13.4 Differential diagnoses for abdominal masses.
•• Cyst
•• Hematoma
•• Abscess
•• Neoplasia
•• Granuloma
•• Nodular regeneration, hyperplasia, extramedullary
hematopoiesis (liver and spleen)
•• Physiologic enlargement (e.g. renal hypertrophy or splenomegaly due to tranquilization)
•• Distension of a hollow viscus (gastrointestinal tract,
urinary bladder, uterus)
•• Organ torsion/congestion

Figure 13.5 Lateral abdominal radiograph of a dog with
generalized hepatomegaly due to vacuolar hepatopathy
associated with hyperadrenocorticism. There is caudal
extension of the caudoventral liver margin, which is rounded
(white arrows). The gastric axis is caudally displaced (dotted
white line) due to caudal and dorsal displacement of the gastric
body and pylorus relative to the gastric fundus (black arrows).

Table 13.2 Classification of hepatomegaly with respective differential diagnoses.
Generalized hepatomegaly

Focal hepatomegaly

Nodular liver

•• Vacuolar hepatopathy (e.g. steroid
hepatopathy, hepatic lipidosis)
•• Passive congestion
•• Hepatitis
•• Infiltrative neoplasia
(e.g. ­lymphoma, mast cell tumor)
•• Amyloidosis

•• Primary hepatic neoplasia (e.g. hepatocellular
carcinoma in dogs, biliary cystadenoma in cats)
•• Regenerative changes
•• Cyst
•• Abscess
•• Hematoma
•• Granuloma
•• Liver lobe torsion

•• Metastatic neoplasia (with
hepatomegaly)
•• Nodular regeneration (with
hepatomegaly)
•• Hepatocutaneous syndrome
(with hepatomegaly)
•• Cirrhosis/fibrosis (with
microhepatia)

K22463_C013.indd 518

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

Nodular hepatomegaly will appear as a generalized
enlargement; however, margination is very irregular,
rather than the smooth margins maintained by true
generalized hepatomegaly. Differential diagnoses are
ranked differently with metastatic neoplasia, nodular
regeneration, and hepatocutaneous syndrome being
most likely.
Focal hepatomegaly is caused by a mass. Differential
diagnoses for masses are listed in Box 13.4. However, once
it is determined that the organ of origin is most likely to
be liver, the ranking can be organized to include neoplasia, regenerative changes, cyst, and abscess at the top of
the list. Focal hepatomegaly causes focal caudal displacement of the stomach to the right or left side, depending
on its location. The margin of the liver at the location of
the mass tends to be rounded rather than sharp. Most
liver masses appear ventral in location, but dorsal masses
can occur. Masses cranial to the stomach are typically
hepatic in origin; however, in some cases, hepatic masses
can extend caudal to the stomach (called a pedunculated
liver mass), appearing in the location of the splenic tail on
lateral views (Figures 13.6a, b). The most common cause
of liver masses in dogs and cats is neoplasia. The most
common mass-like neoplasm in the canine liver is hepatocellular carcinoma; in cats it is biliary cystadenoma.

519

Reduced liver size
Microhepatia is diagnosed when the liver size is small, as
denoted by a cranially positioned gastric axis. The causes
of microhepatia are shown in Box 13.5. Shape can sometimes be used to distinguish the causes of microhepatia.
In cases of cirrhosis/fibrosis the liver margin may be
irregular in shape, giving it a nodular appearance. This
abnormal shape is not always radiographically apparent,
however. Additionally, ascites is uncommonly present in
dogs with a congenital portosystemic shunt, so the presence of peritoneal effusion makes cirrhosis, fibrosis, or
noncirrhotic portal hypertension more likely.

Alterations in hepatic opacity
Radiographic abnormalities within the liver can sometimes appear as an alteration in opacity. Hepatic mineralization is most commonly due to mineralization within
Box 13.5 Causes of microhepatia.
•• Congenital portosystemic shunt
•• Cirrhosis
•• Fibrosis
•• Microvascular dysplasia
•• Noncirrhotic portal hypertension (portal vein hypoplasia)

13.6

a

b

Figures 13.6a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) abdominal radiographs in a dog with a pedunculated liver mass. A soft tissue
opaque mass with a well-defined rounded ventral and caudal margin (black arrows) is located caudal to the gastric axis (dotted
white line). The mass in located on the right side, causing the stomach to be displaced to the left. Right-sided small intestines are
caudally displaced. A single pedunculated hepatic mass was found on ultrasound examination. A hepatocellular adenoma was
subsequently diagnosed with aspirates.

K22463_C013.indd 519

23/04/16 1:14 pm

520

Diseases of specific organ systems

the intrahepatic biliary system rather than within the
hepatic parenchyma itself.
This causes linear branching mineral opacities that
are most commonly accumulated in the right liver. This
finding is often incidental; however, previous biliary disease or active disease cannot be ruled out. Mineralized
calculi can also accumulate within the gallbladder.
These choleliths can be incidental findings or can result
in obstruction of the common bile duct. They appear as
single, rounded mineral opacities or as an a
­ ccumulation
of mineral opacities within the right ventral liver in the
region of the gallbladder. When multiple smaller calculi are present, the ventral margin of the accumulated
choleliths tends to be rounded. Finally, the g
­ allbladder
wall itself can mineralize due to chronic cholecystitis or cystic mucinous hyperplasia. This appears as a
­well-defined, rounded, thin mineral-rimmed structure in
the right cranial liver in the region of the gallbladder.
Hepatic gas accumulations occasionally occur within
the liver parenchyma. Parenchymal hepatic gas is
most often associated with a mass due to abscessation. Hepatic abscesses are uncommon, typically exist
as a single mass lesion, and most often do not contain
gas. On occasions where gas is present, it will accumulate within the margins of the mass (Figures 13.7a, b).

Concurrent peritoneal effusion is commonly present.
Most often, gas located within the abscess does not extend
to the peritoneal space.

Spleen
After the liver, the spleen should be located and evaluated. The spleen can be divided into a cranial head, body,
and caudal tail. It can be variable in position due to the
mobility of the splenic tail. On the lateral view in dogs,
the tail of the spleen, when visible, is typically in the
cranioventral abdomen caudal to the margin of the liver
and stomach. This is most reliably seen on the right lateral projection. In normal cats, the splenic tail is typically
not visible on the lateral view of the abdomen. The head
of the spleen is sometimes visible on the lateral view in
the craniodorsal abdomen near the plane of the right kidney. The head of the spleen is in a more predictable, stable
position due to the presence of the gastrosplenic ligament. On the ventrodorsal view, the head of the spleen is
the portion that is most consistently visible, caudal to the
gastric fundus and cranial to the left kidney, as a triangular soft tissue opacity that is formed where the spleen
appears end-on near the junction of the splenic head and
body. The overall apparent size of the spleen is smaller
in cats than in dogs. Abnormalities within the spleen

13.7

a

b

Figures 13.7a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) abdominal radiographs in a dog with a hepatic abscess. A large, well-defined,
rounded soft tissue opacity is present in the right cranioventral abdomen (white arrows). The mass causes caudal and dorsal
deviation of small intestines and leftward deviation of the stomach. Multiple, well-defined, variably sized and shaped gas opacities
are located within the mass (black arrows).

K22463_C013.indd 520

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

521

will typically manifest as an alteration in size, shape,
­location/orientation, and rarely, opacity.

Distinction between generalized and focal splenomegaly
is important, as differential diagnoses differ (Table 13.3).

Splenomegaly

Alterations in splenic location

Splenic size can be subjectively assessed. Generalized
splenic enlargement will appear as a subjective increase
in thickness of the splenic tail or head. The margins of
the spleen will be rounded and may or may not be irregular, indicating nodular changes. Mass effect associated
with generalized splenic enlargement will typically cause
rightward displacement of small intestines on the ventrodorsal view and dorsal displacement of intestines on
the lateral view (Figures 13.8a, b). Generalized splenomegaly can cause cranial and ventral displacement of the
gastric fundus. In cats, if the splenic tail is visible on the
lateral view, it is considered to be enlarged. Focal splenomegaly occurs when mass lesions are present within the
spleen. Given the focal nature of many splenic masses,
unaffected sections of the spleen can appear radiographically normal. Masses associated with the splenic head will
be located in the craniodorsal abdomen and on the left
side. Masses associated with the splenic body or tail are
typically more ventral in location and can be right or left
sided. Masses are more commonly seen within the splenic
tail and body, therefore most splenic masses are located
in the ventral cranial to mid abdomen. As a general rule,
masses within the splenic body or tail can appear identical to pedunculated liver masses (Figures 13.9a, b).

Splenic malpositioning due to torsion can occur as a single event (isolated splenic torsion) or, more commonly, in
association with gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV).
Splenic torsion is often accompanied by peritoneal effusion, making the margins of the spleen somewhat indistinct. Indications of splenic torsion include a mass effect in
the cranial to mid-ventral abdomen, a loss of visibility of
the normal splenic head and body in the left cranial abdomen on the ventrodorsal view, visibility of overt splenomegaly, or gas accumulations within the spleen or within
the mass effect associated with the ventral abdomen.
Finally, in cases where splenic margins are readily identified, the position of the spleen may appear as a reverse
‘C’ shape in the ventral mid-abdomen on the lateral view.

Alterations in splenic opacity
Splenic mineralization occurs, most often, secondary to
metabolic diseases such as hyperadrenocorticism; however, it is uncommonly detectable on radiographs. Gas
opacity within the splenic parenchyma rarely occurs, but
can be a sequela to necrotizing splenitis or gas-producing
bacteria within the spleen. This most commonly occurs
secondary to splenic torsion and creates a classic mass
(Figures 13.10a, b).
13.8

a

b

Figures 13.8a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) abdominal radiographs in an anemic dog with marked generalized splenomegaly
due to benign extramedullary hematopoiesis. The margins of the spleen are rounded and there is subjectively increased thickness
of the spleen on both views (arrows). The spleen extends excessively caudally approaching the pelvic inlet. Additionally, the spleen
extends to the caudal abdomen on the right side, as seen on the ventrodorsal view.

K22463_C013.indd 521

23/04/16 1:14 pm

522

Diseases of specific organ systems

13.9

b

a

Figures 13.9a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) abdominal radiographs in a dog with a splenic mass. In the lateral view, a normal
splenic head is seen in the craniodorsal abdomen (white arrowheads). A large, predominantly round, well-defined soft tissue
opacity is present in the left cranial to mid-ventral abdomen (white arrows). The mass causes marked caudal, dorsal, and rightward
displacement of the small intestines and cranial displacement of the gastric fundus (black arrows). Other than spleen, the main
differential for the organ of origin is a pedunculated liver mass.
Table 13.3 Classification of splenomegaly with respective differential diagnoses.
Generalized splenomegaly

Focal splenomegaly (mass)

•• Inflammatory ­splenomegaly (splenitis):
○○ Systemic or peritoneal bacterial infection
○○ Chronic systemic infection
•• Hyperplastic splenomegaly:
○○ Chronic infection
○○ Hemolytic disorders
•• Extramedullary hematopoiesis
•• Congestion:
○○ Tranquilization
○○ Right heart failure
○○ Portal hypertension (rare)
○○ Splenic torsion
•• Infiltrative neoplasia:
○○ Lymphoma
○○ Mast cell tumor
○○ Multiple myeloma
○○ Acute and chronic leukemia
○○ Malignant histiocytosis
•• Amyloidosis

•• Non-neoplastic:
○○ Hematoma
○○ Abscess
○○ Nodular hyperplasia
○○ Infarction
○○ Cyst
○○ Granuloma
•• Neoplastic:
○○ Hemangiosarcoma
○○ Hemangioma
○○ Leiomyosarcoma
○○ Leiomyoma
○○ Myelolipoma
○○ Lymphoma

Retroperitoneal space

visibility, where effusion causing reduced detail in the
peritoneal space often spares the retroperitoneal space,
and vice versa. Causes of retroperitoneal effusion or mass
effect must be considered, with knowledge of organs that

The retroperitoneal space should be the next area evaluated. This space, being physically divided from the peritoneal space, can serve as a comparison for detail of organ

K22463_C013.indd 522

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

523

13.10

a

b

Figures 13.10a, b Lateral cranial (a) and caudal (b) abdominal radiographs in a dog with splenic torsion and secondary splenitis.
Peritoneal detail is reduced due to effusion. A large mass effect is present in the ventral abdomen, which is causing dorsal
displacement of small intestines (arrows). A mass with indistinct margins is located in the ventral abdomen, which is soft tissue
opaque and contains numerous, well-defined, contained gas bubbles. The location and opacity of the mass are classic for splenic
torsion and splenitis.

exist in this space, such as the kidneys, adrenal glands,
and ureters.

Retroperitoneal effusion and mass effect
Poor retroperitoneal detail is most often caused by effusion and/or mass. Retroperitoneal effusion causes a
decrease in delineation of the renal margins. This may be
unilateral or extend across the right and left peritoneal
spaces. A large volume of fluid can cause a mass effect
within the peritoneum where the colon and small intestines are pushed ventrally. When retroperitoneal detail
is poor, the concurrent presence of a mass may not be
readily visible. The masses themselves can cause similar
border effacement of retroperitoneal structures. Causes of
retroperitoneal effusion are shown in Box 13.6 and are
best distinguished by considering fluid types. Causes of
effusion must be considered together with history and
clinical signs. For example, a history of trauma makes
urine or hemorrhage the most likely cause of retroperitoneal hemorrhage, whereas a renal neoplasm is more
likely if the animal has a history of hematuria.

K22463_C013.indd 523

Box 13.6 Causes of retroperitoneal effusion.
•• Urine:
○○ Kidney rupture
○○ Ureteral rupture
•• Hemorrhage:
○○ Kidney rupture
○○ Rodenticide/coagulopathy
○○ Neoplasia (renal, adrenal gland, retroperitoneal
sarcoma)
•• Exudate:
○○ Renal abscessation
○○ Retroperitoneal abscess (including migrating
foreign body)
•• Transudate/modified transudate:
○○ Urinary obstruction
○○ Severe acute interstitial nephritis
Neoplastic effusion

Sublumbar lymph nodes
The medial iliac lymph nodes are located lateral to the
aorta near the location of its trifurcation where the
external iliac arteries branch from the abdominal

23/04/16 1:14 pm

524

Diseases of specific organ systems

aorta. Caudal to this, the internal iliac lymph nodes are
located where the internal arteries branch. These lymph
nodes combined are often called the sublumbar lymph
nodes. They are radiographically invisible in normal
cats and dogs. With severe enlargement, the sublumbar lymph nodes can cause a mass effect, displacing the
distal descending colon ventrally near the pelvic inlet
(Figure 13.11). When sublumbar lymphadenopathy is
present, urogenital/perineal neoplasms or multicentric
lymphoma should be considered first.

Upper urinary tract
Both kidneys and the ureters are retroperitoneal. The
­normal renal size in dogs is within 2.5–3.5 times the
length of the L2 vertebral body as measured on the ventrodorsal view. In cats, the size of normal kidneys is within
2.0–3.0 times the length of the L2 vertebral body on the
ventrodorsal view. Also, both kidneys should be similar
in size. Normal ureters are never seen radiographically;
excretory urography is the only imaging modality that
will allow assessment of the ureters.

Kidneys
Abnormalities associated with the kidneys will appear
as an alteration in size, shape, opacity, and, rarely, number. Abnormal renal size must always be considered in
combination with renal shape. Additionally, differential
diagnoses are often ranked according to whether the
13.11

Figure 13.11 Lateral abdominal radiograph in a dog with
transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder. A moderately
well-defined soft tissue opaque mass is present in the caudal
dorsal abdomen (black arrows). The mass is causing ventral
displacement of the distal descending colon (white arrow).
Additionally, there is a very indistinct, irregular periosteal
reaction associated with the ventral L7 vertebral body
consistent with an aggressive bone lesion and metastatic
disease (arrowhead).

K22463_C013.indd 524

radiographic abnormalities are unilateral or bilateral.
An algorithmic approach can be used to determine differential diagnoses for the appearance of the kidneys,
while taking clinical abnormalities into consideration
(Box 13.7). Compression radiographs should be obtained
in cases where the kidneys are not easily seen due to a
superimposed GI tract and when clinical evidence suggests renal disease.

Small kidneys
Small irregular kidneys (Figures 13.12a, b) are most often
secondary to chronic renal disease or chronic obstructive
uropathy. Renal dysplasia must also be considered in
young animals having small irregular kidneys, as the two
causes can appear identical.

Renomegaly
Enlarged kidneys can cause a mass effect in the ­dorsal
abdomen that can be right sided, left sided, or both,
depending on the laterality of the diseased kidney(s).
Ventral displacement of the intestines can be seen with
renal masses or retroperitoneal effusion. Enlarged kidneys
that are smoothly marginated or irregular have numerous causes that often require more advanced imaging,
such as excretory urography or ultrasonography, to differentiate them. Determination of the presence of unilateral
or bilateral disease can assist with likely diagnoses, as
some diseases such as acute kidney injury (AKI), pyelonephritis, lymphoma, feline infectious peritonitis, and amyloid deposition tend to be bilateral, while h
­ ydronephrosis
and pyonephrosis tend to be unilateral. Renal carcinoma
can be unilateral or bilateral and is often accompanied by
retroperitoneal effusion due to ­hemorrhage. Peritoneal
effusion is also occasionally seen because of invasion
through the peritoneal lining. Subcapsular fluid accumulations due to perinephric pseudocyst occur in cats and
dogs, but are more commonly reported in cats where subcapsular edema can accompany AKI and urinary obstruction. Renomegaly can be severe and may be bilateral
(Figures 13.13a, b) or unilateral. Polycystic kidneys are
most commonly seen in Persian cats where they have an
autosomal dominant mode of inheritance, but the condition has been reported in Bull Terriers, which also have an
autosomal dominant mode of inheritance.

Renal mineralization and nephroliths
Nephroliths associated with the kidneys are ­
typically
located in the region of the renal pelvices and can
be variable in size. Nephroliths may persist indefinitely in the renal pelvis or they may migrate into
the ureter, ­increasing the risk of urinary obstruction.

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

525

Box 13.7 Algorithmic approach to differentiating causes of abnormal kidneys.
Radiographic
appearance of
kidneys

Enlarged

Small

Smooth

Unilateral

1. Chronic renal
disease
2. Chronic
obstructive
uropathy

Irregular

Bilateral

1. Chronic renal
disease
2. Renal dysplasia

Unilateral

1. Chronic renal
disease
2. Chronic
obstructive
uropathy
3. Renal cortical
infarcts

Smooth

Bilateral

1. Chronic renal
disease
2. Renal dysplasia
3. Renal cortical
infarcts

Nephrocalcinosis because of parenchymal mineralization may be dystrophic due to chronic disease or
metastatic due to diseases resulting in altered calcium
and phosphorus metabolism. Classic nephrocalcinosis
appears as parallel linear mineralization located in the
region of the renal diverticula. Parenchymal mineralization can accompany oxalate crystal deposition in ethylene g
­ lycol intoxication; however, this is generally not
visible radiographically. When the presence of nephroliths or nephrocalcinosis is unclear because of superimposition, compression of the kidneys could be performed
to confirm suspicion (Figures 13.14a, b).

Emphysematous pyelonephritis
On rare occasions, gas can accumulate within the kidneys,
most often within the renal pelvis, due to the presence
of gas-forming bacteria or reflux of gas from the u
­ rinary
bladder. Emphysematous pyelonephritis most often

K22463_C013.indd 525

Irregular

Unilateral

Bilateral

1. Hydronephrosis
2. Subcapsular fluid
accumulations (e.g.
perinephric
pseudocyst,
abscess,
hemorrhage)
3. Compensatory
hypertrophy
(contralateral
kidney may be
small)
4. Primary renal
neoplasm (more
often irregular)

1. Acute renal
disease
2. Acute
pyelonephritis
3. Renal lymphoma
4. Feline infectious
peritonitis
5. Compensatory
hypertrophy
6. Amyloid
deposition
7. Bilateral
hydronephrosis
8. Bilateral
subcapsular fluid
accumulations

Unilateral

Bilateral

1. Primary renal
neoplasm
2. Renal cyst(s)
3. Hematoma
4. Abscess
5. Granuloma

1. Renal lymphoma
2. Polycystic
kidneys
3. Feline infectious
peritonitis
4. Bilateral primary
renal or metastatic
neoplasms

occurs in combination with emphysematous ­cystitis in
diabetic animals (see Lower urinary tract).

Ureters
As previously mentioned, ureters should never be seen
radiographically without contrast in normal animals.
The most common cause of ureteral visibility is due to
ureterolithiasis. Ureteroliths appear as mineral o
­ pacities
that are superimposed in the presumed location of a
­ureter (Figures 13.15a, b). In many instances, excretory
urography or abdominal ultrasound is needed to confirm the presumed location of the calculus within the
ureter.

Adrenal glands
Both adrenal glands are retroperitoneal in location.
They are paired and located medial to the cranial poles
of each kidney. The aorta borders the left adrenal gland

23/04/16 1:14 pm

526

Diseases of specific organ systems

13.12

a

b
Figures 13.12a, b Lateral and ventrodorsal abdominal radiographs (a) with accompanying schematics (b) showing small and
irregular kidneys in a cat. Both kidneys are small in size and are markedly rounded and irregularly marginated (highlighted in
13.12b). In an older animal, this may be due to chronic kidney disease or chronic obstructive uropathy. In younger animals, renal
dysplasia must also be considered.
13.13

a

b

Figures 13.13a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) radiographs in a cat with a history of chronic kidney disease and an increasingly
distended abdomen due to bilateral perinephric pseudocysts. A marked mass effect is seen causing ventral displacement of the
colon and small intestines (black arrows), indicating a retroperitoneal organ of origin. The kidneys are markedly enlarged, but
remain smoothly marginated (white arrows).

K22463_C013.indd 526

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

527

13.14

a

b

Figures 13.14a, b Ventrodorsal (a) and compression ventrodorsal (b) abdominal radiographs in a dog with small nephroliths.
The kidneys were poorly seen on the survey study due to superimposed colon and small intestines. Superimposed over the left
kidney, a small mineral opacity appeared to extend beyond the margins of the colon (a, white arrow). On the compression view,
the margins of the left kidney are better identified (b, black arrows) and small calculi can be seen in the region of the renal pelvis
(b, white arrows).

13.15

a

b

Figures 13.15a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) abdominal radiographs in a dog with azotemia and lethargy. Multiple
mineral opaque calculi are superimposed over the kidneys. The largest calculus (black arrows), however, is superimposed medial
to the margin of the right kidney in the expected location of a ureter. A small amount of soft tissue opaque streaking is present
in the retroperitoneal space (white arrow). Urinary obstruction due to ureterolithiasis was confirmed on ultrasound examination.
Numerous, round, well-defined calculi are also present within the urinary bladder.

K22463_C013.indd 527

23/04/16 1:14 pm

528

Diseases of specific organ systems

medially. The right adrenal gland is bordered by the
caudal vena cava medially. Adrenal glands are not identified radiographically in normal animals. However,
their position relative to the kidneys creates a unique
appearance when they are enlarged and a mass effect
is created. When an adrenal gland creates a mass effect,
it can cause lateral displacement of the cranial pole
of its adjacent kidney. When severely enlarged, adrenal masses cause caudal displacement of the adjacent
kidney and, often, the cranial pole of the kidney is dorsally displaced (Figures 13.16a, b). Masses associated
with the adrenal glands are most commonly ­neoplastic.
Animals with adenomas or a
­denomatous hyperplasia
due to p
­ituitary-dependent Cushing’s disease do not
usually have radiographically visible adrenal glands.
Bilateral adrenal mineralization can occur as a normal
aging process in cats.

Reproductive tract
Female reproductive tract
The uterine body is a tube located between the urinary
bladder and the descending colon; its horns extend to
each ovary. The uterus is typically not radiographically

visible in normal animals. Visibility of the uterus is considered abnormal and indicates enlargement. The uterus
is not expected to be larger in diameter than the small
intestines in the normal animal.
Uterine enlargement results in a mass effect that
causes dorsal, cranial, and medial displacement of small
intestines. Various degrees of uterine enlargement can
be seen ranging from mild to severe (Figures 13.17a, b).
Differential diagnoses for generalized uterine enlargement include pregnancy, pyometra, mucometra, and
hydrometra. Incorporation of clinical signs and history
are needed to distinguish these causes. Mass lesions due
to neoplasia, abscess, granuloma, hematoma, or cyst can
also occur and create a mass effect with similar displacement of organs. Concurrent peritoneal effusion is often
present with pyometra, stump pyometra, or inflammatory uterine diseases.
Uterine enlargement is readily detectable in ­pregnant
cats and dogs prior to fetal mineralization. In dogs, the
uterus is visible at 30 days post luteinizing hormone (LH)
surge. In cats, uterine swelling can be seen at 17–21 days.
Mineralization of the fetal skeleton initiates in the axial
skeleton, beginning at 45 days after the LH surge in dogs and

13.16

a

b

Figures 13.16a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) abdominal radiographs in a dog presenting for acute vomiting and a suspected
foreign body. A retroperitoneal mass effect is present (white arrows), causing ventral and rightward displacement of cranial
abdominal small intestines. Normal shaped right (dotted black arrows) and left (black arrows) kidneys are visible. An additional,
large, round, soft tissue opacity having a well-defined dorsal and lateral margin is visible in the left craniodorsal abdomen. This
structure is causing marked caudal displacement and altered orientation of the left kidney, causing its cranial pole to be dorsally
displaced. A rim of mineral is present at the lateral caudal periphery of the mass (white arrowhead). A mild amount of soft tissue
opaque streaking is present in the peritoneal space (dotted white arrows), which is causing mild decreased detail.

K22463_C013.indd 528

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

529

13.17

a

b
Figures 13.17a, b Lateral and ventrodorsal abdominal radiographs in two dogs with different degrees of uterine enlargement due
to pyometra. In 13.17a, there is moderate uterine enlargement with a soft tissue opaque tube visible bordering the dorsal aspect
of the urinary bladder and located at the periphery of the right and left abdomen (a, black arrows). A small amount of soft tissue
opaque streaking is present within abdominal fat near the left body wall (dotted white arrow), denoting a small volume of regional
effusion. Marked uterine enlargement is shown in 13.17b. Tubular-shaped soft tissue opacities are located in the caudal ventral to
mid abdomen (b, black arrows). The typical mass effect for uterine enlargement is cranial and dorsal displacement of intestines,
which are often pushed medially (b, white arrows).

K22463_C013.indd 529

23/04/16 1:14 pm

530

Diseases of specific organ systems

at 36–45 days after breeding in cats. Mineralization of the
skeleton can be used to roughly estimate the stage of pregnancy and the likelihood of imminent parturition. In dogs
and cats, the final skeletal structures to ­mineralize are the
distal limbs (metatarsi, metacarpi, and phalanges) and the
teeth. Once these are radiographically m
­ ineralized and
visible, parturition can be expected within 0–5 days in
dogs and 0–6 days in cats.
Radiography is insensitive to fetal distress compared with ultrasound. If fetuses have been dead for
>24 hours, signs of death may be visible as emphysematous changes within the uterus or fetus (Figures 13.18a, b)
or collapse of the axial skeleton. Additionally, some causes
of fetal dystocia are radiographically visible, such as fetal
malposition, extreme maternofetal disproportion, or narrowed pelvic canal due to previous trauma.

Male reproductive tract
The prostate gland encircles the proximal urethra. The
prostate gland in cats is not visible. To the author’s knowledge, abnormalities causing a radiographically visible
prostate in cats have never been reported. In neutered
dogs, the prostate gland is typically not identified, but is
occasionally seen when the colon is empty or when compression radiography is used. When an enlarged prostate
is present, the most reliable indicator of a prostatic organ

of origin is the fat opaque triangle located between the
urinary bladder and the prostate gland.
In intact males, the prostate gland most often becomes
radiographically visible because of benign hypertrophy,
which is the most common cause of prostatic enlargement
(Figure 13.19). The prostate usually encompasses <50% of
the diameter of the pelvic inlet from the sacrum to the
pubis on the lateral view. The prostate will be intrapelvic
in young dogs and will become intra-abdominal as the
prostate enlarges in older intact males. Scottish Terrier
dogs are reported to have increased severity of prostatomegaly due to benign hypertrophy. Prostatitis can cause
radiographically visible enlargement and is more commonly diagnosed in intact dogs. Occasionally, regional
peritoneal effusion and peritonitis is present when prostatitis is severe. Regardless, prostatic disease should be
considered in male dogs having a ventral caudal abdominal mass effect.
The incidence of prostatic neoplasia is similar in intact
and neutered males; however prostatic neoplasia is highly
likely in neutered males having a radiographically visible prostate and signs associated with prostatic disease.
Mineralization is a common feature of prostatic neoplasia, but it is also less commonly found in benign prostatic
enlargements. Generally, mineralization that occurs with
benign prostatic diseases is not radiographically visible,

13.18

a

b

Figures 13.18a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsdal (b) abdominal radiographs in a dog having dystocia of unknown duration. A single
full-term fetus is present. Dystocia likely occurred due to maternofetal disproportion where the skull (black arrows) was unable to
pass through the pelvic canal. Emphysematous metritis is present (white arrowheads), evidenced by gas accumulations within the
uterus and surrounding the fetus. Gas is also present within the fetal thorax and abdomen (white arrows).

K22463_C013.indd 530

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

531

Lower urinary tract
Urinary bladder

but can be more readily identified on ultrasound examination. Prostatic neoplasms commonly metastasize to
the sublumbar lymph nodes, caudal lumbar spine, and
pelvis. In male dogs with visible sublumbar lymphadenopathy or aggressive bone lesions of the caudal lumbar spine or pelvis, prostatic neoplasia should be ruled
out as an underlying cause, regardless of whether prostatic enlargement or mineralization is radiographically
­visible or not (Figure 13.20).
Prostatic mass effects due to abscessation, cyst,
or paraprostatic cyst occur less commonly. Prostatic
abscesses and intraprostatic cysts will have a similar
radiographic appearance to benign hypertrophy or prostatitis. However, inflammatory prostatic lesions due to
abscessation are more likely to have regional peritoneal
effusion. Paraprostatic cysts occur peripheral to the prostate and have a radiographic appearance that is distinct
from prostatomegaly alone. In most cases, the paraprostatic cyst is located to the right or the left of the urinary
­bladder, thus overlapping the urinary bladder on the
lateral view, rather than being located caudal to the urinary bladder. Therefore, the typical fat opaque triangle
associated with prostatic enlargement may not be a feature of paraprostatic cyst unless concurrent radiographically visible ­prostatomegaly is present. The appearance
of paraprostatic cysts mimics that of a supernumerary
­urinary bladder.

The urinary bladder is almost always visible on the
­lateral view in cats and dogs regardless of its size. It must
be moderately distended before becoming visible on the
ventrodorsal view. Bladder size can be variable, ­therefore
its position is inconsistent. Abnormalities associated with
the urinary bladder are typically seen as an alteration in
opacity or an abnormally large size in an animal showing clinical signs associated with urinary obstruction.
Urinary bladder position can also be abnormal, but this
is less commonly encountered.
Mineral opacity associated with the urinary bladder
is most commonly due to radiopaque urocystic calculi.
Calculi are radiopaque because of the presence of calcium in their composition. This includes mainly calcium
phosphate and calcium oxalate stones or combinations
of stone that are mixed (e.g. magnesium ammonium
phosphate, also called struvite, which often contains calcium phosphate). Urate and cystine urocalculi are often
­radiolucent, but may contain some degree of calcification, making them faintly visible. In general, the determination of urocystic calculus composition cannot be
definitively made radiographically. Urinary calculi can
be variable in size and shape. Urocystic calculi should
be mobile, therefore they will most often be superimposed over the body of the urinary bladder centrally

13.19

13.20

Figure 13.19 Lateral abdominal radiograph in a dog with
prostatomegaly due to benign hypertrophy. The fat triangle
(between white arrowheads) located between the prostate and
the urinary bladder indicates a prostatic organ of origin for
the rounded soft tissue opacity at the pelvic inlet. The prostate
is enlarged (black arrow), encompassing less than 50% of the
dorsoventral diameter of the pelvic inlet. The urinary bladder is
cranially positioned (white arrow) likely due to prostatomegaly.

K22463_C013.indd 531

Figure 13.20 Lateral abdominal radiograph in a dog with
prostatic neoplasia. The prostate is radiographically visible
(black arrow) and contains a small amount of pinpoint
mineral near its ventral margin. There is mass effect in
the caudal dorsal abdomen, which is causing mild ventral
displacement of the distal descending colon (white arrows)
consistent with sublumbar lymphadenopathy. Indistinct
mineral is superimposed ventral to the caudal lumbar spine
(white arrowheads). The ventral margin of these vertebrae is
indistinct, indicating an aggressive bone lesion. This is due to
metastatic disease from prostatic neoplasia.

23/04/16 1:14 pm

532

Diseases of specific organ systems

on orthogonal views. Mineral that is superimposed in a
­noncentral location over the urinary bladder indicates a
lack of mobility and may be due to adherent luminal calculi or sediment, mineralization of the urinary bladder
wall, or mineralized neoplasia.
Gas opacity is occasionally identified within the
­urinary bladder associated with the lumen or the urinary
bladder wall. Most commonly, gas is found in the lumen
and is iatrogenic due to catheterization or cystocentesis.
In these cases, the gas bubble is mobile and will locate in
the most nongravity-dependent part of the urinary bladder as the animal is positioned in lateral or ventrodorsal
recumbency. As a result, the bubble will be located at the
level of the urinary bladder body on both views. Rarely,
gas can be located within the urinary bladder due to
gas-forming bacteria, most commonly in diabetic animals
with glucose-fermenting infections. Emphysematous cystitis can result in luminal gas or mural gas within the
urinary bladder wall. When gas is located within the
urinary bladder wall, it will remain superimposed over
the same portion of the urinary bladder regardless of the
view or the position of the animal and is curvilinear in
shape, following the margin of the urinary bladder wall
(Figures 13.21a, b). Reflux of gas through the ureters or
presence of concurrent emphysematous pyelonephritis
will cause gas to be located within the region of the renal
pelvis.

Urethra
In male dogs, the urethra can be divided into the prostatic
urethra, the membranous urethra, and the penile urethra.
As its name implies, the prostatic urethra is located in the
prostate; the membranous urethra is located caudal to
the prostate. The landmark for the ­junction between the
membranous urethra and the penile urethra is the ischial
arch. The penile urethra distal to the ischial arch is the
longest portion in dogs. The male feline urethra is divided
into pelvic and penile parts, where the ischial arch is the
landmark for the junction between the two sections. The
pelvic part is the longest portion of the urethra in the male
cat and includes preprostatic, prostatic, and postprostatic
parts. The female urethra in cats and dogs has a pelvic and
postpelvic part. When the urinary bladder is distended,
the pelvic urethra is more cranially positioned and can be
radiographically visible within the abdomen, especially in
cats. Otherwise, the urethra is not identified as a separate
structure radiographically.
When assessing male dogs for suspected urinary calculi, especially if evidence of urinary obstruction is present or the urinary bladder is distended, a flexed hip view
centered at the pelvis and including the perineal region
should be incorporated into the protocol so that the entire
urethra is visible without superimposition by the femurs
(Figures 13.22a, b). Evaluation of the urethra on both lateral and flexed lateral views will also prevent mistaking the

13.21

a

b

Figures 13.21a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) abdominal radiographs in a dog with emphysematous cystitis. Rather than gas
being superimposed over the body of the urinary bladder, as would be expected with mobile luminal gas, a curvilinear rim of gas is
present at the bladder apex, consistent with its presence within the urinary bladder wall (arrows).

K22463_C013.indd 532

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

fabellae for penile urethral calculi, as the fabellae will move
with the femur with each view. Keep in mind that, in male
dogs, urethral calculi tend to obstruct at the level of the os
penis (Figures 13.22a, b). The flexed hip view is not necessary in cats or in female dogs; however, the views should
include the entire perineal region. The pelvic u
­ rethra is

533

another location common for obstruction, ­
especially in
female dogs. The portion of the urethra within the pelvis
must be closely evaluated on both views to ensure that a calculus is not overlooked as a normal part of the bony pelvis
(Figures 13.23a, b). The size of a urinary calculus that can
pass through the entire urethra is not reliably predictable.
13.22

a

b

Figures 13.22a, b Standard lateral (a) and flexed hindlimb lateral (b) abdominal radiographs in a male dog with clinical signs
consistent with urinary obstruction. Multiple, round, well-defined calculi are present within the penile urethra (arrows). To confirm
the correct number of calculi, a flexed hindlimb view (b) is needed to view the entire urethra and remove superimposition of the
femurs over the urethra.
13.23

a

b

Figures 13.23a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) abdominal radiographs in a female dog with clinical signs associated with urinary
obstruction. Numerous calculi are readily visible within the urinary bladder (white arrows). A single, large calculus is present within
the pelvic urethra, which is superimposed over the bony pelvis on both views (between black arrows). This calculus was not initially
identified prior to removal of the bladder calculi and was removed on a subsequent cystotomy.

K22463_C013.indd 533

23/04/16 1:14 pm

534

Diseases of specific organ systems

Gastrointestinal tract
When evaluating the intestines, the colon should be
­identified first because it is in a more predictable location
and is easier to recognize. Next, any remaining intestine
that is distended or has abnormal contents is probably
within small intestine, making it more likely to be of clinical significance. It is common for beginner interpreters
to only recognize portions of the GI tract containing gas
and ignore portions that are empty or contain only fluid
opacity. Attempts must be made to evaluate portions that
are soft tissue/fluid opaque as they may be abnormal and
the gas-filled loops more normal. Also, many beginner
interpreters assume a decrease in peritoneal detail when
evaluating the abdomen of an animal having little to no
luminal gas within the intestines. Evaluation of serosal margins to determine their visibility will confirm or
reject the presence of decreased serosal detail.

Stomach
A normal size measurement for the stomach does not
exist; therefore, distension is a subjective determination.
An empty stomach is typically intercostal in location.
With increasing distension, the stomach extends caudally
and ventrally, as commonly seen in cats and especially
dogs that have recently eaten large volumes. The fundus
is always the largest portion of the stomach regardless of
the degree of distension (this is useful when evaluating
the stomach for malpositioning). The fundus should be
located on the left side of the abdomen and is dorsal. In
dogs, the gastric body crosses from left to right and is the

most ventral portion of the stomach. The pyloric antrum
and pylorus are slightly more dorsal in location than the
gastric body and are located on the right side. In cats, the
stomach is ‘J’ shaped and is primarily located on the left
side, with the pylorus being close to midline. Alterations
in stomach size, position, and opacity can occur.

Gastric distension
A distended stomach causes caudal displacement of
small intestines and the head and tail of the spleen.
Gastric dilatation can be caused by mechanical or functional ileus. Several considerations should be made when
­evaluating a distended stomach. The clinical signs, history, and description of the luminal content alter the
ranking of differential diagnoses associated with a distended stomach. In the case of recent ingestion, the luminal content of the stomach is usually an inhomogeneous
mixture of gas, soft tissue, and, sometimes, granular or
faint mineral opaque material. The content of the stomach can rarely be definitively distinguished as food or
foreign material. Foreign materials, such as tough, expansile glues containing diphenylmethane diisocyanate,
and indigestible ­materials, such as fabric or grass, can
have an inhomogeneous appearance similar to that of
recently ingested food. When it is unclear whether or not
the stomach is filled with food or foreign material, repeat
radiographs should be obtained 6–8 hours after fasting
to see if gastric emptying is occurring. If the stomach is
identical after this period of time, foreign or indigestible
material (Figures 13.24a, b) should be considered.

13.24

a

b

Figures 13.24a, b Lateral abdominal radiographs in an anorexic dog that vomited once prior to presentation. The stomach is
moderately distended with inhomogeneous gas and soft tissue opaque material (a, arrows). This could be due to recent ingestion of
food or to indigestible foreign material. The dog was fasted for 24 hours and the study repeated (b). The stomach is almost identical
in appearance (arrows), consistent with a lack of movement of content from the stomach and the presence of indigestible material.
A large volume of hay was removed endoscopically.

K22463_C013.indd 534

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

In an animal with a functional ileus or a pyloric
outflow obstruction, the stomach may or may not be
­
distended, depending on the effectiveness of vomiting.
Gastric ­contents in an animal that is concurrently anorexic
often appear as a homogeneous shade of gray consistent
with a combination of gas and fluid (Figures 13.25a, b)
rather than the inhomogeneous opacity seen with recent
ingestion of food or a stomach filled with nondigestible material. Pyloric outflow obstructions can occur due
to luminal foreign material that is nonmobile and lodged
within the pylorus/proximal duodenum or can be due to
mural thickening or a mass at the same level. The most
common causes of a functional gastric ileus are acute gastritis or pancreatitis.
When a stomach containing homogeneous gas and
fluid is encountered, the next step is to obtain a left lateral view. The left lateral view will allow luminal fluid to
fall to the gravity-dependent gastric fundus on the left
side, while gas rises to the nongravity-dependent pyloric
antrum on the right side. This recumbency will allow
gas to highlight materials that may be obstructing the
pylorus and are not mobile, given that these materials
are often soft tissue opaque (Figures 13.26a, b). Mobile
soft tissue opaque materials (food or foreign) will follow
luminal fluid with recumbency, being similarly gravity
dependent, and may remain effaced by any fluid present,

535

depending on the volume of gas versus fluid present in the
stomach. Therefore, mobile foreign objects are not readily
identified unless they are mineral or metal opaque or are
surrounded, at least in part, by gas, allowing their structure to be revealed. Effort should be made to determine
the degree to which foreign material extends into the
small intestinal tract, as lengthy or linear foreign bodies
must be removed surgically rather than endoscopically.
The left lateral projection can be used to highlight some
mural gastric wall or pyloric abnormalities if they are
large enough to extend into the lumen or create an irregular gas pattern in the pyloric antrum (Figures 13.27a–c).
In cases where the left lateral view does not reveal a
luminal foreign object, a mural abnormality or luminal
obstruction not highlighted by gas cannot totally be ruled
out; however, causes of functional ileus such as gastritis
and pancreatitis are considered higher on the differential diagnosis list, especially if acute vomiting is the predominant clinical sign. The left lateral projection can also
be used to prove that a cranioventral mass is a distended
stomach rather than a liver or splenic mass.
Gastric wall masses are not usually diagnosed on radiographs alone because it can be difficult to differentiate a
mass typically effaced by surrounding organs and luminal
content unless a luminal abnormality can be highlighted
by gas. A stomach wall mass can cause a similar mass

13.25

a

b

Figures 13.25a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) abdominal radiographs in a dog presenting for vomiting. The stomach is
distended (arrows), causing caudal displacement of the small intestines and the spleen. The stomach is a homogeneous shade of
gray created by a combination of luminal gas and fluid. This appearance is not typical for an animal that has recently eaten. It is
more typical for a functional ileus or a pyloric outflow obstruction.

K22463_C013.indd 535

23/04/16 1:14 pm

536

Diseases of specific organ systems

13.26

a

b

Figures 13.26a, b Right (a) and left (b) lateral radiographs in a dog presenting for acute and frequent vomiting. On the right lateral
view, a distended stomach is seen (a, white arrows) which contained a shade of gray consistent with gas and fluid content. Due to
recumbency in the right lateral view, gas is located in the gastric fundus (a, black arrows) and fluid is located at the level of the
pylorus. Because of the clinical signs and appearance of the stomach, a left lateral projection was obtained. On this view, gas fills
the nongravity-dependent pyloric antrum (b, black arrows) while fluid falls to the gastric fundus. Gas within the pylorus highlights
a well-defined, tubular, soft tissue opacity (b, white arrowheads). This opacity is pyloric in location and must be nonmobile because
it did not fall with luminal fluid to the gravity-dependent gastric fundus in the left lateral view, indicating positive evidence for
obstruction. A rope toy and plastic pieces were removed surgically.

effect to that seen with luminal gastric distension (i.e.
caudal displacement of small intestines and the spleen).
In many cases a positive (barium sulfate, most commonly)
or negative (room air, most commonly) contrast upper GI
study or an abdominal ultrasound is ultimately required
to determine the presence of a gastric wall mass.

Gastric malpositioning
Alterations in stomach positioning can occur due to mass
effect from surrounding organs or to volvulus. If the diaphragm is ruptured, the stomach can be cranially displaced within the pleural space or in the location of the
liver, and may be difficult to locate unless distended or
contrast is administered. A small liver can cause a cranially positioned stomach. Conversely, hepatomegaly can
cause caudal displacement of the stomach.
Volvulus occurs when the stomach axis rotates, typically clockwise when viewing the animal from caudal to
cranial, altering the relative positions of the gastric fundus and pylorus. The pylorus rotates cranially, dorsally,
and to the left while the fundus rotates to the right and
ventrally. Often, the stomach is massively dilated concurrent with volvulus, hence the term GDV. In most cases the

K22463_C013.indd 536

stomach contains a large volume of gas; however, fluid or
inhomogeneous ingesta may be the most notable luminal
contents. The motion of gas and fluid within the normal
stomach must be understood in order to appreciate the
radiographic abnormalities that occur with GDV. The right
lateral recumbent view is often the only view needed to
evaluate for the presence of gastric malpositioning; however, additional views can be performed, if necessary.
Due to gastric malpositioning with GDV, instead of fluid
falling to the pylorus in the right lateral view, gas will
rise to the pylorus, which is abnormally located on the
left side. Therefore, having gas present in the pylorus on
the right lateral view is a positive indication of gastric
malpositioning (Figure 13.28). The volvulus combined
with the severe distension creates a compartmentalized
appearance to the stomach, which appears to be divided
by a soft tissue band. This descriptive configuration of
gastric ­
malpositioning occurs with a 180-degree torsion, which is the most common torsion. In the case of a
360-degree torsion, gas and fluid will behave as expected
in a normal animal, except that massive gastric distension will be seen, ­making this degree of volvulus more
easily overlooked.

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

537

13.27

a

b

c

Figures 13.27a–c Right lateral (a), ventrodorsal (b), and
left lateral (c) abdominal radiographs in a dog presenting
for increasing episodes of vomiting over several weeks. The
stomach is moderately distended and contains a large amount
of gas, causing a darker gray opacity; however, some fluid is
also present, which makes the gravity-dependent part of the
stomach difficult to evaluate. In the right lateral projection
(a), gas is present in the fundus, while luminal fluid falls to the
gravity-dependent part of the stomach, the pylorus. Rugal folds
located within the gastric body and fundus are highlighted by
gas on the right lateral and ventrodorsal views (a and b, white
arrows). Additionally, an indistinct soft tissue opacity is seen at
the right gastric body and pyloric antrum on the ventrodorsal
view (b, black arrows). This may be mobile luminal fluid or
ingested content. On the left lateral view (c), gas has risen to
the nongravity-dependent pyloric antrum and highlights a soft
tissue mass that is partially surrounded by gas, has an irregular
luminal margin (black arrows), and provides a more convincing
view of a mural abnormality. Gastric adenocarcinoma was
diagnosed via endoscopic samples.

Several secondary changes are commonly encountered
in conjunction with a GDV. Microcardia, small pulmonary
vasculature, and a small caudal vena cava occur secondary to poor cardiovascular return of volume and shock.
An obstructive megaesophagus and small intestinal paralytic ileus also commonly occur. Due to the gastrosplenic

K22463_C013.indd 537

ligament, rotation of the stomach can result in concurrent
splenic torsion. Finally, necrosis of the gastric wall, although
not commonly evident on radiographs, can manifest as
pneumatosis or gas within the stomach wall (Figure 13.28).
An alteration in stomach opacity occurs most
­commonly due to radiopaque luminal material that may

23/04/16 1:14 pm

538

Diseases of specific organ systems

13.28

Box 13.8 Descriptors for evaluation of small intestines.
•• Location
•• Luminal content
•• Serosal margin shape and margination
•• Path of small intestinal loops
•• Apparent number of small intestinal loops
•• Diameter

Figure 13.28 Right lateral abdominal radiograph in a dog with
gastric dilatation and volvulus. Each portion of the stomach
is labeled. On a right lateral view, the pylorus should contain
fluid. In this case, the pylorus (identified as being the smallest
gastric compartment) contains gas and is located dorsally and
cranially. The fact that the pylorus contains gas in right lateral
recumbency indicates that it is located on the left side of the
dog. A thick soft tissue opaque band (between black arrows)
is present between the gastric body and pylorus, typical for
the compartmentalization seen with massive distension and
volvulus. Additionally, an irregular line of gas borders the
ventral aspect of the gastric fundus, indicating intramural gas
(gastric pneumatosis) and wall necrosis (white arrows).

be mineral or metal opaque and can be obstructive, or
benign. True alterations in stomach opacity can occur
due to mural gas (gastric pneumatosis) or mucosal mineralization as reported with uremic gastritis. In cats, fat
within the submucosal layer of the stomach is sometimes
radiographically visible as a lucent line paralleling the
gastric wall and is a normal finding. This fat layer is not
present in dogs and its identification in cats must not
be mistaken for pneumatosis. Mineralization associated
with uremic gastritis occurs in the mucosal layer and can
result in a faint mineral line that follows the rugal folds,
likely due to metastatic mineralization and formation of
whitlockite crystals.

Small intestines
Inexperienced interpreters often rely solely on small
intestinal diameter as an indication of abnormality.
Several other descriptors exist that should be evaluated
when interpreting small intestine and are summarized
in Box 13.8. With regard to small intestinal diameter,

K22463_C013.indd 538

multiple measurements have been published for normal small intestine diameter. In dogs, the normal small
intestinal diameter should be less than two rib widths.
Also, an increase in diameter of a small intestinal
­segment >50% of the diameter of the remaining small
intestinal loops is considered abnormal. Small intestinal dilation >1.6 times the dorsoventral diameter of the
narrowest point of the L5 vertebral body is significantly
associated with mechanical obstruction. Small intestines
in cats should measure <12 mm in diameter. Small intestine must be distinguished from colon. The diameter of
the colon can vary greatly, being quite large and often
containing inhomogeneous fecal material in normal
animals. Finding similar luminal material within small
intestines to that normally seen within the colon is often
of significance.
The luminal content in small intestines should be
homogeneous in appearance. The small intestines normally contain gas or fluid, or are empty, producing a
shade of gray depending on the volume of gas located
within the segment. Additionally, normal luminal gas
forms ­
well-defined tubes or ovals without causing
­distension. Dogs tend to have more luminal gas than cats;
however, great variation exists depending on the degree
of aerophagia. Because they tend to be more evident,
loops containing gas are often evaluated more closely by
beginner interpreters than uniformly soft tissue opaque
loops; attempts must be made to evaluate loops that are
empty or have homogeneous soft tissue opaque content.
Inhomogeneous small intestinal content, having either a
definable structure or more descriptively matching luminal feces located within the large intestine, should raise
suspicion of foreign material, especially when associated
clinical signs are present. Obtaining right and left lateral recumbent views redistributes luminal gas and fluid
within the small intestines and can make the presence of
an abnormality more visible.
The serosal margin of small intestinal loops should
be linear, smooth, and well defined. A roughened serosal
margin most commonly occurs with fine plication due
to the typically thin thread-like material, which causes
linear foreign bodies in cats. Mural small intestinal
­

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

masses can also cause an irregular serosal surface to
small ­intestinal loops.
Normal intestinal loops have a path comprised of multiple broad turns. The presence of a tortuous path consisting of tight turns should raise suspicion for plication due
to linear foreign material. Plication also tends to create
a reduction in the apparent number of small intestinal
loops. With severe small intestinal dilation, the small
intestinal path can have extremely tight turns (so-called
hairpin turns) giving the loops a stacked appearance with
squared-off ends, indicating small intestinal crowding
due to increased luminal volume (Figure 13.29).
The diameter of the small intestines should be uniform
across all segments and should be within measurements
previously discussed. When considering causes of dilated
small intestines, segmental distribution of dilation is
probably the most useful descriptor in determining the
presence of obstruction; uniform dilation is more often
associated with a functional ileus and the presence of
dilated small intestinal loops in combination with loops
that are normal in diameter is more characteristic of
mechanical obstruction.

Small intestinal mechanical obstruction
Small intestinal mechanical obstruction falls into two
main categories, focal discrete obstruction and linear obstruction, and these have important differences
in ­
radiographic appearance. The typical radiographic
appearance for a discrete obstruction is small intestinal dilation that is segmental in nature. In other words,
some distended loops are identified and, ­importantly,
some loops that are normal in diameter are also identified. With more distal obstructions, an increase in the
number of dilated small intestinal loops relative to normal ones is often identified because ­distension occurs
orad to the obstruction. Potential causes for a discrete
obstruction include luminal foreign material, a mural
mass, or an intussusception. Close evaluation of small
intestinal ­
content may reveal the presence of focal
structured or inhomogeneous material, further raising suspicion of mechanical obstruction due to foreign
material. Sometimes, the discrete obstruction can have
a characteristic appearance, such as a corncob having
a lucent grid at regular intervals (Figure 13.29) or a
textile having linear gas and soft tissue opaque striations (Figure 13.30). Additionally, luminal intestinal gas
can highlight a foreign object, creating a gas–soft tissue
interface that is inconsistent with a normal luminal gas
bubble (Figure 13.31). Redistribution of gas using both
lateral recumbencies can assist with foreign body diagnosis by potentially highlighting such interfaces. The lack of

K22463_C013.indd 539

539

13.29

Figure 13.29 Lateral abdominal radiograph in a dog presenting
for acute, frequent vomiting. A massively distended loop
of small intestine containing mostly gas is present in the
cranial abdomen (between white arrows). Due to the extreme
distension, the loop of intestine is stacked upon itself and
takes a hairpin turn, creating a squared-off end in the dorsal
abdomen. The stacked intestinal walls create an apparent soft
tissue opaque band (between white arrowheads) separating
the luminal gas within each segment. Ventrally, a structured
inhomogeneous opacity composed of gas and soft tissue is
present, which is partially surrounded by gas (between black
arrows). Multiple small intestinal loops are normal in diameter
(black arrowheads). Mechanical obstruction due to a corncob
foreign body was diagnosed.

identification of the obstructing material should not preclude a diagnosis of obstruction when remaining descriptors indicate mechanical ileus.
Small intestinal masses can cause a focal, discrete
obstruction. Small intestinal masses are most commonly
neoplastic due to adenocarcinoma, lymphoma, or leiomyosarcoma. Focal masses can be circumferential surrounding the entire lumen (more typical of adenocarcinoma) or
eccentric involving one side of the intestine (more typical
of leiomyosarcoma). Diffuse or multifocal neoplasms such
as lymphoma also occur. Focal, discrete, circumferential
masses are most likely to cause mechanical obstruction.
An accumulation of granular mineral material at a location within the intestinal tract (called a gravel sign) indicates a partial chronic obstruction, most likely due to a
focal mural small intestinal mass where mineral opaque
or desiccated material accumulates at the site of obstruction. The absence of small intestinal dilation does not rule
a mechanical obstruction out. Especially with proximal
small intestinal mechanical obstructions, frequent and
effective vomiting can limit visible distension. In general, the small intestinal dilation seen with focal, discrete
mechanical obstruction is often greater than the dilation
seen with a paralytic or functional ileus.

23/04/16 1:14 pm

540

Diseases of specific organ systems

13.30

Figure 13.30 Lateral abdominal radiograph in a dog presenting with acute, frequent vomiting. Multiple gas-filled small intestinal
loops are dilated. Too many visible dilated loops are present to be due to colon alone. In the caudoventral abdomen, a loop
containing inhomogeneous luminal material having linear gas and soft tissue opaque striations is present (in boxed inset and
between arrows), which is typical for textile material. A hand towel was surgically removed.

13.31

Figure 13.31 Lateral abdominal radiograph of a dog that had been vomiting for 1 week. A gas-distended small intestinal loop is
present (between black arrows). Several normal diameter loops are also present (white arrowheads). At the caudal aspect of the
gas-distended loop, an irregularly marginated interface between the gas and a soft tissue opacity is seen (boxed inset, white arrows).
The small intestinal loop visibly dilates at the level of this soft tissue opacity (dotted white arrows). A plastic toy nose was removed
surgically.

Linear foreign material tends to span large portions of
the GI tract, causing small intestinal plication but not necessarily dilation. A tortuous path of small intestine or the
presence of visible plication creating an irregular serosal margin is the most reliable evidence of a linear foreign body. Plication occurs because the ­material is fixed in
one position while one end travels distally through the

K22463_C013.indd 540

GI tract, where continual peristalsis causes the intestine
to gather around the material like pleats in a drape. Two
main features distinguish linear foreign bodies in cats
from those in dogs. First, in cats, linear foreign material
is usually very thin, such as thread or floss. Because of
this, the plication that occurs with linear foreign material
tends to be fine, appearing as an irregular serosal margin

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

with little to no measurable small intestinal distension
(Figures 13.32a, b). The small intestines can appear
decreased in number and aggregated in a focal location
(usually the right abdomen); however, these are often the
least useful features for identification of linear foreign
bodies and can be confused with the intestinal appearance in normal animals, especially obese cats. Some small
intestinal loops may have small, irregular gas bubbles
that are piriform in shape as gas becomes trapped in the
pleats. Also, in cats, the material often becomes anchored
at the base of the tongue, so examination of the mouth
may confirm suspicion of linear foreign material. Linear
foreign material in dogs tends to be thick textile material,
such as socks, rope toys, and towels. This material tends
to anchor at the level of the pylorus, causing an outflow
obstruction. Because of the size of the linear material,
small intestinal dilation is commonly seen with linear foreign body obstructions in dogs (Figures 13.33a, b). Also,
due to the location of the obstruction at the pylorus, a left
lateral view of a stomach containing adequate gas often
reveals the origin of the linear object. Due to the thick
nature of the textile causing most obstructions, the plication seen in a dog is characterized by frequent changes in
direction of the small intestinal loop rather than the fine
pleating that occurs with linear foreign material in cats.

Functional ileus
Functional ileus results in visible dilation of small intestines that is often diffuse, but on some occasions can be
focal. Focal narrowing of small intestine due to segmental

541

peristaltic contractions is not seen radiographically
when paralytic ileus is the cause of small intestinal dilation. Peritonitis, pancreatitis, enteritis, and infiltrative
bowel neoplasms (e.g. lymphoma and mast cell tumor) are
the most common causes of functional ileus. The distension
that occurs with functional ileus is not usually as great as
that seen with mechanical obstruction. Regardless, functional ileus cannot always be distinguished from a distal
mechanical obstruction without ultrasound examination
or a positive contrast GI study. Less common causes of
functional ileus, such as bowel ischemia and thrombosis
or dysautonomia, can cause a profound small intestinal
dilation that may be segmental rather than diffuse.

Colon
The colon is in a relatively predictable location and often
contains luminal gas or feces, making it readily identifiable in most cases Locating the colon should be the
first step in evaluating the intestinal tract. The cecum
is rarely identified in cats. The normal colon is typically larger in diameter than the small intestines and,
as previously mentioned, is the only intestinal segment
whose contents should be inhomogeneous, appearing
as a ­mixture of gas, soft tissue, and granular mineral
in locations where fecal material is present. Material of
this characterization located in small intestines would
be considered abnormal. Normal large intestinal diameter is difficult to characterize because it is so variable;
­however, the colon diameter should not exceed the length
of the L7 vertebral body.
13.32

a

b

Figures 13.32a, b Lateral abdominal radiograph (a) and magnified compression view (b) in a cat presenting for acute vomiting. The
serosal margins of the loops are irregular with a tortuous path (a and b, black arrows). Several, small gas bubbles are trapped within
the pleats of the plicated intestinal loops (a, white arrowheads). The plication of small intestines causes an apparent reduction in the
number of intestinal loops.

K22463_C013.indd 541

23/04/16 1:14 pm

542

Diseases of specific organ systems

13.33

a

b

Figures 13.33a, b Lateral abdominal radiograph (a) and magnified compression view (b) in a dog presenting with acute, frequent
vomiting. Multiple ventrally located small intestinal loops have a tortuous path (a, black arrows). The loops are also increased
in diameter when compared with more normal loops (a, black arrowheads). The luminal content within the tortuous loops is
nonhomogeneous (b, white arrowheads), indicating foreign material. An unraveled carpet was removed surgically.

Alterations in colon location, size, and opacity can
occur in diseased animals. Colon displacement occurs
most commonly due to the abdominal mass effects
previously discussed. Mass effects causing concurrent
colon displacement and compression with subsequent
­extramural obstruction occur near the pelvic inlet, usually due to sublumbar lymph node or prostatic enlargement. Abnormal luminal distension is either due to
functional or mechanical obstruction. Functional causes
of colon enlargement due to nutritional, metabolic,
neurologic, or chronic obstructive causes will result in
a generalized enlargement of the colon (called megacolon). Mechanical causes of colon dilation result in
enlargement orad to the obstruction and can be due to
extramural, mural, or luminal causes. The most common location for a mechanical colon obstruction is at the
level of the ­pelvic inlet, therefore generalized megacolon tends to occur with functional or mechanical causes.
Alterations in opacity of the colon most typically occur
due to changes in ­luminal ­content. In animals having
diarrhea, the colon will be characterized by a homogeneous gas or fluid opaque lumen rather than the inhomogeneous mixture typically seen with formed feces,
making its contents similar in appearance to small intestinal content. Of course, an empty colon will appear soft
tissue opaque and will be small in ­diameter. Colon masses
or ­
intussusceptions appear h
­ omogeneously soft tissue
opaque. In many cases, an interface will occur where the

K22463_C013.indd 542

homogeneously opaque obstructive mass or intussusceptum contacts inhomogeneous feces in a dilated colon
(Figure 13.34). In most cases, when f­oreign ­material is
positively located within the colon, surgical intervention
is not required. Therefore, the interpreter must ascertain
the origin of any radiopaque foreign objects or structured
appearing materials prior to deciding on a treatment
plan. In some cases, contrast procedures are needed to
confirm the exact location of suspicious ­material or a
distended loop of intestine (pneumocolonography using
room air is very useful to delineate the true location of
the colon).

Pancreas
The right pancreatic limb borders the duodenum, the
pancreatic body is located near the cranial duodenal flexure, and the left pancreatic limb borders the greater curvature of the stomach. The pancreas is never identified
radiographically in the normal dog. Occasionally, in fat
cats, the pancreas can be seen as an indistinct soft tissue
opacity located between the gastric fundus, left kidney,
and the spleen. Pancreatic diseases most often produce
clinical GI signs. Rarely, radiographically visible changes
are seen with pancreatic disease; however, radiographs
are still recommended to assist with ruling out other
potential causes of clinical signs. On occasions where
radiographic changes of pancreatic disease are present, it
will typically manifest as a loss in peritoneal detail (focal

23/04/16 1:14 pm

Approach to abdominal radiographs

543

13.34

Figure 13.34 Lateral abdominal radiograph in a dog straining
to defecate. The descending colon is markedly distended,
causing it to be ventrally located in the abdomen. A portion of
the colon is nearly homogeneously soft tissue opaque (between
black arrows). Homogeneous soft tissue opacity is unexpected
in a colon that is distended with fecal material. The cranial
aspect of the soft tissue opacity interfaces with more typical
inhomogeneous soft tissue and gas opaque fecal content
(white arrowhead). The caudal aspect of the soft tissue opacity
has a well-defined, flat interface with gas (white arrow). This
configuration indicates gas highlighting a luminal structure.
A circumferential colonic wall mass was found on abdominal
ultrasound. Colonic adenocarcinoma was diagnosed on
aspiration.

13.35

a

b

Figures 13.35a, b Lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) abdominal radiographs in a dog with acute pancreatitis. A focal loss of detail
is present in the cranial abdomen, with an indistinct increase in soft tissue opacity in the right cranial abdomen (black arrows).
The gastric body and pyloric antrum are cranially displaced and compressed with increased left-sided positioning of the stomach
(white arrows). There is increased distance between the stomach and the transverse colon (dotted white line).

or diffuse), a right cranial abdominal mass effect, separation of the stomach from the transverse colon, and/or
dilation of the stomach and the duodenum due to functional ileus (Figures 13.35a, b). The right cranial abdominal mass effect classically causes leftward displacement
of the gastric body with rightward displacement of the
duodenum towards the body wall. Additionally, the

K22463_C013.indd 543

intestines are pushed caudally. Acute pancreatitis is
­
the most common cause of a mass effect associated with
the pancreas; however, pancreatic abscesses, pseudocysts, and neoplasms can have a similar appearance.
Additionally, other organs of origin for a right cranial
abdominal mass, such as liver, gallbladder, and duodenum, must be considered.

23/04/16 1:14 pm

544

Diseases of specific organ systems

SUMMARY

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING

When beginning a review of each study, the focus should
be on systematic evaluation of each organ, keeping in
mind those organs not normally seen radiographically.
Also, an attempt should be made to increase the diagnostic usefulness of abdominal radiography with compression and positional views, and contrast procedures as
warranted. When radiographs fail to diagnose or definitively rule out disease in a clinical patient, referral for
abdominal ultrasound or computed tomography may be
warranted.

Dennis R, Kirkberger RM, Wrigley RH et al. (2001) Handbook
of Small Animal Radiological Differential Diagnosis.
WB Saunders, London.
Kealy JK, McAllister H, Graham JP (2011) Diagnostic Radiology
and Ultrasonography of the Dog and Cat. WB Saunders,
St. Louis.
O’Brien TR (1978) Radiographic Diagnosis of Abdominal Disorders
in the Dog and Cat: Radiographic Interpretation, Clinical Signs,
Pathophysiology. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Thrall DE (2013) Textbook of Veterinary Diagnostic Radiology,
6th edn. WB Saunders, St. Louis.

K22463_C013.indd 544

23/04/16 1:14 pm

545

Chapter 14
Disorders of the nervous system and muscle
Simon R. Platt

DISORDERS OF THE BRAIN
Introduction
Diseases of the forebrain (cerebrum and thalamus) are very
complex and may affect the whole of the central nervous
system (CNS). In veterinary medicine, the clinical symptoms of brain dysfunction can be relatively mild despite
being often associated with a severe lesion. Dogs and cats
with forebrain dysfunction may exhibit clinical signs that
include altered mental status (obtundation more likely
than stupor or coma), behavioral changes, circling in a
wide arc, head-pressing, visual impairment, focal and/or
generalized seizure activity, and hemi-­inattention (unilateral hemineglect) syndrome. Conscious proprioceptive
deficits with a normal to near-normal gait are characteristic of forebrain dysfunction. Neck pain may be appreciable in some patients with structural brain lesions. Lesions
from the midbrain (mesencephalon) through the medulla
(myelencephalon) may lead to altered mental status (stupor or coma more likely than with forebrain lesions),
proprioceptive and gait abnormalities, deficits in cranial
nerves (CNs) III–XII, and central vestibular dysfunction.

This evaluation is very similar to that of the patient with
severe head trauma and in some respects the Modified
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) system may be useful, although
it has not been universally utilized or validated. Unless
the diagnosis is established from the history (e.g. toxin
ingestion), further testing is usually necessary:

●● Routine laboratory analysis is essential – the ­minimal

●●

●●
●●
●●

Neurodiagnostic investigation
Depending on the localization of the disease, appropriate diagnostic tests should be performed to rule in or out
each disease on the differential diagnosis list. Sometimes,
the underlying disorder is evident, such as with cranial
trauma; however, all too often animals with brain disease
can present a diagnostic challenge. If the animal presents
in a coma, emergency evaluation of airway patency and
vital signs including cardiac function and respiration
should be undertaken, as for animals with head trauma.
The important aspects of the evaluation of animals with
brain disease include:

●●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

Response to noxious stimulation.
The presence of voluntary motor movement.
Posture (i.e. decerebrate rigidity).
Pupillary reactivity to light.
Eye movements (physiologic nystagmus).
Segmental spinal reflexes.

K22463_C014.indd 545

●●

●●

acceptable information should include packed cell
volume (PCV), total protein concentration, blood
urea nitrogen (BUN), electrolytes, and glucose
concentrations.
Urinalysis and urine production rate should
be assessed, which may necessitate urethral
catheterization.
Liver function tests.
Thoracic and abdominal radiographs may be useful
to supplement physical examination findings.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis is indicated
primarily to confirm an inflammatory lesion.
­
Although such analysis is rarely specific, when it is
assessed in conjunction with the patient’s signalment,
history, neurologic signs, and the results of other diagnostic tests (such as serologic assays) it can help to better define the underlying etiology. If there is evidence
or even a suspicion of increased intracranial pressure (ICP) (anisocoria, lack of pupil response to light,
reduced or absent physiologic nystagmus, decreased
or absent response to noxious stimulation), diagnostic
imaging should be performed prior to cisterna magna
or lumbar puncture, which risks promoting further
herniation. In these cases, reducing the ICP using
mannitol (0.5–2.0 g/kg IV) should be considered.
Advanced imaging studies such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
are strongly indicated to assess the integrity of the
intracranial structures.
An electroencephalogram (EEG) records the electrical
activity associated with forebrain structures. An EEG
is rarely specific and with certain cerebral conditions
it also lacks sensitivity. Although rarely used as a
diagnostic tool, electroencephalography can provide

23/04/16 1:20 pm

546

Diseases of specific organ systems

confirmation of brain death (flat or ­isoelectric EEG).
However, other factors, such as patient body
temperature, ­
­
concurrent drug administration, and
cardiac function, must be considered before brain
death is diagnosed.

VASCULAR DISEASE
Definition/overview
Cerebrovascular disease refers to any abnormality of
the brain caused by a pathologic process compromising
blood supply. Pathologic processes that may result in
cerebrovascular disease include occlusion of the lumen
by a thrombus or embolus, rupture of a blood vessel wall,
a lesion or altered permeability of the vessel wall, and
increased viscosity or other changes in the quality of the
blood. Stroke or cerebrovascular accident is the most common clinical presentation of cerebrovascular disease and
is defined as a sudden onset of nonprogressive focal brain
signs secondary to cerebrovascular disease.

Etiology
Vascular disturbances of the nervous system can arise due
to a loss of adequate blood supply (ischemia/infarct) or
hemorrhage into the nervous tissue. The initial process is
focal in the majority of cases. However, it is possible with a
disturbance in systemic perfusion that there is a multifocal,
diffuse hemorrhagic process in the brain with a subsequent
multifocal course. Vascular damage to the nervous system
can be due to various different causes such as neoplasia,
endocrine diseases, CNS infections, atherosclerosis, carcinogenic emboli, vasospasm, hematologic disturbances,
vasculitis, hyperviscosity syndrome, hypertension, coagulopathy, disseminated intravascular coagulation, or sepsis.

Pathophysiology
Ischemia means the reduction of the blood flow to a level
that is not compatible with normal function. An infarct is
a large and continual reduction in the blood flow resulting in tissue necrosis. Hypoxia/ischemia initially particularly affects the most sensitive elements of the tissue and
then subsequently disturbs all the tissue components.
The main mechanism of cell damage found in an infarct
is a reduced energy metabolism.
Spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage is caused by
a bleed within the brain or in its immediate surroundings without accompanying trauma. A brain hemorrhage
can be epidural, subarachnoidal, intraparenchymal,
or intraventricular. Epi- or subdural hemorrhages are
always associated with cranial trauma. Although not
well documented, hypertension appears to play a role

K22463_C014.indd 546

in the development of primary intraparenchymal
­hemorrhage in the dog and cat. Secondary intraparenchymal ­
hemorrhages are associated with reperfusion
disturbances after infarcts, congenital arteriovenous
malformations, ­intracranial tumors, and coagulopathies.
The damage to the brain is the result of compression
or destruction of the surrounding brain tissue. In addition, reduced blood flow to the brain, increased ICP, and
obstructive hydrocephalus can be the consequence of an
intracranial hemorrhage.

Clinical presentation
Generally, cerebrovascular diseases start suddenly and
have a nonprogressive course. The brain dysfunction
due to an infarct is usually focal. The neurologic deficits
depend on the size of the lesion and are usually asymmetrical. The forebrain symptoms are mainly seizures,
possibly in clusters, with contralateral visual and proprioceptive deficits. Behavioral changes are common and
involve compulsive pacing, disorientation, and sudden
attacks of anxiety or aggression. Ipsilateral circling or
head tilt can often be seen.

Differential diagnosis
Head trauma, neoplasia, CNS inflammation.

Diagnosis
Complete blood count (CBC), biochemistry profile, coagulation tests, and a urinalysis are helpful in excluding renal
disease, sepsis, hyperviscosity syndrome, or coagulopathy. Assessment of systemic blood pressure at several time
points is vital. Endocrine evaluations may be necessary
if an endocrine association is suspected based on clinical
evaluation of the patient. Thoracic and abdominal imaging is important to consider to rule out cavity neoplasia.
Electrocardiography and an ultrasonographic investigation
of the heart may be necessary to diagnose heart disease,
although this is a rare association in veterinary medicine.
The most useful specific diagnostic methods are imaging techniques such as CT or MRI. Abnormal changes in
patients with brain infarcts can be visualized with CT
within a few hours. These changes depend on the age of
the lesion and are normally shown as a slightly hypodense
region. An increase in contrast can occur after a few days
in the periphery of the lesion and reflects the capillary
proliferation. CT is a sensitive method of imaging acute
hemorrhages. These appear as hyperdense regions,
which become more demarcated over the next 72 hours
and attain a constant pattern after roughly 4 weeks.
In MRI, an infarct is hypointense in T1-weighted
sequences and hyperintense in T2-weighted sequences
(Figures 14.1a–e). These changes can already be seen an

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

547

14.1

a

b

c

d
Figures 14.1a–e MR images of a 7-year-old mixed-breed dog
with an ischemic stroke (arrows). (a) T1-weighted transverse
image at the level of the cerebellum demonstrating a large
hypointense lesion (arrow). (b) T2-weighted transverse image
at the same level demonstrating the lesion as hyperintense.
(c) Midline sagittal T2-weighted image demonstrating the
well-demarcated hyperintense lesion within the cerebellum.
(d) Dorsal plane diffusion-weighted image demonstrating
the lesion as hyperintense. (e) At the same level, an
apparent diffusion coefficient map demonstrates the lesion
as a signal void.
e

K22463_C014.indd 547

23/04/16 1:20 pm

548

Diseases of specific organ systems

hour after the start of the infarct, meaning that MRI is
more sensitive for the visualization of an infarct than
CT. In comparison, the depiction of a hemorrhage with
MRI is more complicated and depends on the age of
the lesion. As infarct and hemorrhage can occur at the
same time, CT is often preferred in the acute stages to differentiate between these two different types of disease.

Management
Treatment of dogs with ischemic events to the brain is
largely supportive. The aim of the treatment is to ensure
an adequate oxygen supply to the tissue, to treat neurological problems and the causative disease.
Oxygen supplementation is often enough in many
cases. Hypovolemia should be treated with fluids,
although administration of large volumes of crystalloids
should be avoided as this causes a worsening of cerebral
edema and can increase the ICP. Diazepam (0.5–1.0 mg/kg
IV) and barbiturates (phenobarbital 2–5 mg/kg PO q12h)
can be used to control seizure activity and reduce the
brain metabolism.
The prognosis for dogs with focal brain infarcts is variable, but most have a guarded to fair prognosis for recovery of partial or full function.

ANOMALOUS/DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS
congenital hydrocephalus

●● Obstruction of CSF flow in cats as a result of ependymitis and vasculitis associated with CNS infection with
feline coronavirus (which causes feline infectious
peritonitis [FIP]).

Pathophysiology
Diffuse ventricular enlargement suggests congenital
ventricular dilatation or obstruction at the level of the
lateral apertures or foramen magnum. Focal ventricular
enlargement suggests focal obstruction or loss of parenchymal cells. It is not uncommon to have asymmetrical
bilateral lateral ventricle enlargement. Animals with an
asymmetrical appearance of the ventricles should be critically evaluated for focal obstruction of, or impingement
on, the ventricular system due to mass effect. Elevation
of ICP associated with hydrocephalus can occur in cases
of acute severe obstruction to CSF flow or chronically
enlarged ventricles with little cortical mantle remaining
to absorb pressure.
Initial pathologic changes are found in the ependyma
at the angles of the lateral ventricles. Loss of integrity
of the ependymal surface allows water to leak into the
periventricular white matter, causing edema. Further
enlargement of the ventricles causes direct damage to
the white matter due to compression. Treatment needs
to be considered prior to damage affecting the cerebral
cortex.

Definition/overview

Clinical presentation

Hydrocephalus is the term used to describe a c­ ondition
of abnormal dilatation of the ventricular system within
the brain. It can be further subdivided into ­obstructive
and ­
nonobstructive types. Ventricular ­
dilatation
occurs with some frequency in dogs and cats due
to a v
­ariety of ­
intracranial disease processes. Some
breeds are ­
predisposed to congenital ­
hydrocephalus,
including
­
Chihuahuas,
Pomeranians,
Yorkshire
Terriers, English Bulldogs, Lhasa Apsos, Toy Poodles, Cairn
Terriers, Boston Terriers, Pugs, Pekingese, and Maltese.

Hydrocephalus can result in clinical signs due to loss of
neurons or neuronal function and/or alterations in ICP
and all of its consequences. Clinical signs of hydrocephalus can reflect the anatomic level of disease involvement
or can represent a diffuse disease process. The severity
of the clinical signs is not necessarily dependent on the
degree of ventricular dilatation, but rather on a host of
concurrent abnormalities including the underlying disease process, associated ICP changes, intraventricular
hemorrhage, and the acuity of ventricular obstruction.
In animals with severe hydrocephalus, the compressed
layer of cortex is prone to tearing either spontaneously or
with minor trauma, causing a sudden onset of focal signs
of forebrain disease.
In young dogs prior to ossification of the cranial
sutures, hydrocephalus may contribute to abnormalities
of skull development such as a thinning of the bone structure, a dome-shaped or bossed appearance to the head
(Figure 14.2), or a persistent fontanelle.
A ventral and/or lateral strabismus has been noted
in humans and animals with hydrocephalus. This is

Etiology
Hydrocephalus can result from:

●● Obstruction (intraventricular or extraventricular) of
the ventricular system (e.g. brain tumor).

●● Increased size of the ventricles due to loss of brain
parenchyma (hydrocephalus ex vacuo).

●● No obvious cause (congenital).
●● The overproduction of CSF associated with a choroid
plexus tumor (rare).

K22463_C014.indd 548

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

­sometimes referred to as the ‘setting sun sign’. Confusion
remains as to the underlying reason for this clinical finding. It has been suggested that this appearance is associated with skull deformity and distortion of the orbits.
Others suggest that because this abnormality can be
improved with shunting of the lateral and third ventricles, the strabismus is associated with pressure on the
mesencephalic tegmentum.
As a result of the involvement of the forebrain and
brainstem structures in hydrocephalus, alterations in
awareness and cognition are common. Many congenitally
affected animals may appear less intelligent than normal
and be difficult to house train. In addition to alterations
in consciousness, aggression, circling, paresis, and seizures
may also be seen. Central visual dysfunction can occur with
compression of the optic radiations and occipital cortex.
Occasionally, when hydrocephalus is associated with
fourth ventricle enlargement, there may be pronounced
vestibular dysfunction.

549

14.2

Figure 14.2 A 2-year-old Cavalier King Charles Spaniel with a
domed skull due to its underlying hydrocephalus.
14.3

Differential diagnosis
Lissencephaly, hepatic (metabolic) encephalopathy.

Diagnosis
The diagnosis of hydrocephalus is aided by information
obtained from a variety of imaging and electrophysiologic studies. Historical invasive techniques (such as
pneumoventriculography and contrast ventriculography) have been replaced by noninvasive evaluations
Ultrasonography can be used to diagnose hydrocephalus (Figure 14.3). This is most readily accomplished when
a fontanelle is present, as it provides an acoustic window
(ultrasound waves do not adequately penetrate the skull).
In general, correlation between the degree of ventricular
enlargement and clinical signs is poor. CT is often useful for defining ventricular size. The ventricular system
is usually readily identifiable due to its relatively dark
signal in comparison with the parenchyma. CT evaluation also affords the ability to examine the majority of
the ventricular system as well as additional intracranial
structures. MRI also affords evaluation of the ventricular
system (Figure 14.4). It is now recognized that many toy
breeds that are predisposed to hydrocephalus also have
anomalies such as Chiari-like malformations, which can
potentially complicate their management and are only
detected on MRI.

Figure 14.3 Ultrasound of the cerebral cavity reveals extensive
ventricular volume as a hypoechoic (dark) signal within the
more hyperechoic parenchyma.
14.4

Management
Although the prognosis for resolution of hydrocephalus is uncertain, there are several medical and surgical
options that may be beneficial. The choice of treatment

K22463_C014.indd 549

Figure 14.4 T2-weighted transverse MR image at the level of
the brainstem depicts large lateral ventricles hyperintense to
the surrounding parenchyma.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

550

Diseases of specific organ systems

is generally dictated by physical status, age of the
­animal, and cause of the hydrocephalus. Medical treatment may include ­general supportive care and drugs
to limit CSF production and reduce ICP. Surgical treatment is designed to provide drainage of CSF from the
brain to another site for absorption. Glucocorticoids are
often used for ­medical treatment. Prednisone may be
given (0.25–0.5 mg/kg PO q12h, then gradually reduced
at weekly ­intervals to 0.1 mg/kg PO q48h). This dose is
continued for at least 1 month, after which time it is discontinued, if possible. Some animals can be adequately
managed with long-term ­glucocorticoid administration
at low doses. If no clinical benefits are observed within
2 weeks, or if s­ ide-effects develop, other forms of therapy should be tried. Acetazolamide (a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor) is thought to reduce CSF pressure by
decreasing CSF ­production. Its effectiveness in treating
hydrocephalus is inconsistent. Omeprazole has also been
administered for the treatment of clinical signs related
to ­hydrocephalus; however, positive ­outcomes are also
inconsistent.
Surgery is generally required for those animals that
do not improve within 2 weeks, if deterioration occurs
during corticosteroid therapy, or if there is an obstructive cause such as a tumor that cannot be resected. As a
successful outcome may be more likely in animals that
have ­minimal clinical signs, surgery may be appropriate in animals with a VB (height of ventricle to height
of brain) ratio >60%, although, few owners are ­willing to
undergo the expense and risk of shunt placement if their
dog appears healthy. Ventriculoperitoneal shunts are
most commonly used in small animals. Complications
of shunt placement occur in approximately 20% of
cases.

the level of the foramen magnum. There is c­onvincing
­evidence in the CKCS breed that CLMS is a heritable disease, although the exact mode of inheritance has not
been determined.

chiari-like malformation syndrome

Most dogs with CLMS are presented for evaluation as
young adults, between 3 and 6 years of age. However, the
age range for this disorder is very broad, ranging from
less than 6 months to more than 12 years of age. Dogs that
are presented at <2 years of age often have more severe
clinical signs than older dogs. There is a wide ­spectrum
of possible neurologic presentations for dogs with CLMS,
including cervical myelopathy, cerebellovestibular
­dysfunction, and forebrain dysfunction (e.g. seizure activity). Cervical dysfunction and cerebellovestibular dysfunction are the most common and are often both present
(e.g. multifocal CNS disease). Some specific c­ linical findings in dogs with CLMS include cervical and cranial hyperesthesia, forelimb weakness, hindlimb ataxia, p
­ ersistent
scratching (at the head, neck, and shoulder region, often
without making skin contact), scoliosis, and facial nerve
paresis/paralysis (unilateral or bilateral).

Definition/overview
Chiari-like malformation syndrome (CLMS) is the canine
analog of Chiari type I malformation of people. Although
only recently described in dogs, CLMS appears to be a very
common neurologic disorder in this species. This disease
is almost exclusive to small breed dogs, with the Cavalier
King Charles Spaniel (CKCS) being the most overrepresented. Other breeds commonly encountered with CLMS
include Brussels Griffon, Miniature/Toy Poodle, Yorkshire
Terrier, Maltese, Pug, Pomeranian, and Pekingese.

Etiology
The disorder is a congenital malformation of the suboccipital bone, leading to overcrowding of the caudal fossa
and compression of the cervicomedullary junction at

K22463_C014.indd 550

Pathophysiology
Progressive alterations in pressure dynamics between
the intracranial and spinal compartments are believed
to be responsible for the development of clinical
signs of CLMS. Although aberrant pressure dynamics due to obstruction of CSF pathways at the level of
the foramen magnum are generally agreed to cause
syringomyelia in CLMS, the exact mechanism of this
development is unknown and there are multiple theories
proposed to explain it. Newer ­theories suggest that the
­syringomyelia fluid is actually derived from extracellular fluid from the cord itself, either driven into the central canal via a pulse p
­ ressure wave from behind the
foramen ­
magnum ­
obstruction and/or drawn into the
central canal via a ­
centrifugally directed ­
hydrostatic
­pressure force within the spinal cord. Common to all
theories of s­ yrinx ­development in CLMS is the causative
factor of ­obstruction of normal CSF flow at the foramen
magnum.
The clinical sign of scratching activity is believed to be
due to the syrinx interfering with spinothalamic tracts
and/or dorsal horn neurons, resulting in abnormal sensations (dysesthesia/paresthesia). Scoliosis (torticollis) is
most likely due to asymmetric syrinx damage to sensory
proprioceptive neurons innervating cervical musculature; an alternative, less likely, hypothesis is syrinx damage to lower motor neurons (LMNs) innervating cervical
musculature.

Clinical presentation

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

551

14.5

Scratching activity and neck discomfort often are
­exacerbated by stress or excitement, and physical contact
with the neck/shoulder region (e.g. collar).

Diagnosis
Consistent findings on MR imaging indicative of CLMS
are attenuation/obliteration of the dorsal subarachnoid
space at the cervicomedullary junction and rostral displacement of the caudal cerebellum by the suboccipital
bone (Figure 14.5). Other common MRI findings in CLMS
include syringomyelia (usually C2 level caudally), herniation of the caudal cerebellum through the foramen magnum, and a ‘kinked’ appearance of the caudal medulla. In
the absence of concurrent disease processes, CSF analysis
is usually normal; occasionally, a mild mononuclear pleocytosis may be apparent.

Management
Treatment of CLMS can be divided into medical and
­surgical therapy. Medical therapy generally falls into
three categories: analgesic drugs (implies relief of
dysesthesia/paresthesia also), drugs that decrease
CSF production, and corticosteroid therapy. By far the
most useful drug available for relief of the scratching
activity associated with syringomyelia is gabapentin
(10 mg/kg PO q8h). Orally administered opioid drugs
are sometimes helpful in alleviating neck and head
pain in CLMS dogs. A number of drugs aimed at decreasing CSF production have been used in CLMS patients
in an effort to diminish the CSF pulse pressure. They
include omeprazole (a proton pump inhibitor), acetazolamide (a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor), and furosemide
(a loop diuretic). Corticosteroids are often used in medical management of CLMS. An initial anti-inflammatory
prednisone dose of 0.5 mg/kg PO q12h is often effective
in controlling clinical signs. In most cases of CLMS, medical therapy will diminish the severity of clinical signs,
but resolution is unlikely. The preferred surgical procedure for treatment of CLMS in dogs is foramen magnum
decompression.

intracranial arachnoid cyst (diverticulum)
Definition and overview
Intracranial arachnoid cyst (IAC) (also termed intra-­
arachnoid cyst) is a developmental brain disorder in
which CSF is thought to accumulate within a split of the
arachnoid membrane. All reported canine cases have
been in the caudal fossa. Because IAC is typically associated with the quadrigeminal cistern in dogs, these accumulations of fluid are often called quadrigeminal cysts

K22463_C014.indd 551

Figure 14.5 T2-weighted sagittal MR image of the brain and
skull of a Brussels Griffon dog; the arrow points to a hypoplastic
occipital bone, which is causing compression and herniation
of the cerebellum through the foramen magnum, classic for
Chiari-like malformation in dogs.

in this species. The vast majority of reported IAC cases
in dogs have been small breeds, with a predominance of
brachycephalic dogs.

Etiology
The cause of this developmental anomaly is unknown.

Pathophysiology
It is believed that some aberration of CSF flow from the
choroid plexuses during development forces a separation
within the forming arachnoid layer, eventually leading
to the creation of an IAC. The mechanisms by which an
IAC continues to expand with fluid are unknown. Fluid
may be secreted by the arachnoid cells lining the cyst
cavity.

Clinical presentation
There is a wide age range at clinical presentation for dogs
with IAC (2 months to 10 years), with an a
­ pproximate
average age of 4 years. The most common clinical
­
signs seen with IAC are forebrain (including seizure
­activity) and/or central vestibular ­(cerebellovestibular)
dysfunction. Dogs may also present with a pri­
mary ­complaint of neck pain. They can be incidental
findings.

Differential diagnosis
Hydrocephalus, congenital portosystemic shunt, hepatic
encephalopathy, infectious CNS disease, toxicities.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

552

Diseases of specific organ systems

14.6

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is typically made via CT or (preferably)
MRI (Figure 14.6). IACs can also be visualized using
ultrasound imaging (via foramen magnum, t­emporal
­
window, and/or persistent bregmatic fontanelle),
­especially in younger dogs. The characteristic appearance of an IAC is a large, well-demarcated, fluid-filled
structure, isointense with the CSF spaces and located
­
between the caudal c­erebrum and rostral cerebellum.
Because IAC may be an incidental finding, it is important
to rule out ­concurrent inflammatory disease (i.e. by using
CSF examination).

Figure 14.6 Sagittal T2-weighted midline brain MR image
of a 2-year-old toy breed dog with a large cyst dorsal to and
compressing the cerebellum and brainstem.

Management

14.7

Medical treatment for IAC is identical to that described
for congenital hydrocephalus (see above) (e.g. corticosteroids, diuretics, anticonvulsants if indicated). Dogs with
an IAC tend to respond initially to medical therapy, but
the response is often temporary. Surgical management of
IACs is typically either achieved via cyst fenestration or
cystoperitoneal shunt placement.

DEGENERATIVE DISEASES
inherited neurodegenerative diseases
Definition/overview
Neurodegenerative diseases can affect any part of
the nervous system and commonly result in dysfunction of the brain. Examples include multisystem neuronal ­
degeneration of Cocker Spaniels, spongiform
­degenerations in Labrador Retrievers, Samoyeds, Silky
Terriers, Dalmatians (cavitating leukodystrophy),
­mixed-breed dogs and Egyptian Mau kittens, and multisystemic ­chromatolytic neuronal degeneration in Cairn
Terriers.

Etiology
The likely etiology for many of these diseases is genetic,
although it has not been elucidated in most of them.

Pathophysiology
Storage diseases are due to an inborn error of m
­ etabolism
and the absence of a vital enzyme necessary to break
down endogenous body substances. These ­
substances
then accumulate within the neuron or other cells associated with the nervous system and eventually cause
­cellular dysfunction (Figure 14.7). The numerous storage diseases of small animals have been reviewed in
detail in other publications (see Recommended further
reading).

K22463_C014.indd 552

Figure 14.7 Intracytoplasmic storage material in the majority of
the neurons of the trigeminal ganglion of a dog with GM2 storage
disease. The tissue is stained with hematoxylin and eosin.

Clinical presentation
The majority of degenerative diseases involving the
nervous system result in clinical signs early in life,
­
usually with an onset at <1 year of age. Many are breed
related and presumed inherited. Clinical signs are
slowly progressive with severe alterations in consciousness ­occurring relatively late in the disease course. Most
diseases cause multifocal neurologic signs and many
­
affect the cerebellum.

Differential diagnosis
Hydrocephalus, congenital portosystemic shunt, hepatic
encephalopathy, infectious CNS disease, toxicities.

Diagnosis
Antemortem diagnosis requires biopsy of the affected
tissue. Determination of the lysosomal enzyme activity
within the brain and other cells may be helpful, but is not
universally clinically available.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

Screening blood and urine for accumulation products
indicative of inborn errors of metabolism may suggest the
presence of a lysosomal storage disease, and in some cases
can be diagnostic. Depending on the disease, abnormal
accumulations may be evident within cells (particularly
macrophages) on buffy coat blood smears and in biopsy
samples from the liver, spleen, lymph nodes, bone marrow,
or nerves. Screening tests performed on fresh urine samples should include evaluation for the following analytes:

●● Urinary organic acids. The accumulation of organic
acids within the body fluids (particularly urine) is
indicative of inborn errors of metabolism such as
L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria in Staffordshire Bull
Terriers.
●● Urinary oligosaccharides. The accumulation of
mannose-containing oligosaccharides in cats is
­
indicative of mannosidosis. The accumulation of high
molecular weight oligosaccharides in dogs and cats
is indicative of GM1 and GM2 gangliosidosis, and of
fucosidosis in English Springer Spaniels.
●● Urinary glycosaminoglycans. The accumulation of
dermatan sulfate is indicative of mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) I, II, VI, and VII. The accumulation of
heparin sulfate is indicative of MPS IIIA and IIIB.
Where the signalment and neurologic signs are suggestive of one or more lysosomal storage diseases, and where
the underlying enzyme defect is known for those diseases, then an enzyme analysis can be performed against
known normal control animals. A reduction in the level of
enzyme activity is indicative of that particular lysosomal
storage disease. Washed white blood cells or cultured skin
fibroblasts are usually the most appropriate cell source
and can be assayed either fresh or fresh-frozen.
Characteristic MRI changes may be apparent with some
canine and feline genetic diseases, although the changes
are rarely specific for a single disease. The lesions usually appear bilaterally symmetrical (e.g. as seen with L-2hydroxyglutaric aciduria in Staffordshire Bull Terriers)
and often result in a decrease in the apparent size of the
cerebellum. Fucosidosis in English Springer Spaniels and
some of the gangliosidoses can also result in notable MRI
abnormalities.

553

for a dog affected by a slowly progressive brain disease is
the most challenging aspect of these diseases.

cognitive disorder
Definition/overview
This neurodegenerative syndrome affects older dogs
and cats. The frequency of this condition is unknown
but it does not seem to affect a specific breed of animal
more commonly.

Etiology
There is no specific etiology identified for this condition.

Pathophysiology
The normal aging brain progressively accumulates oxidative damage and other types of neuropathology that
ultimately result in neuronal dysfunction and cognitive
decline. This syndrome has been likened to the early
stages of Alzheimer’s disease in humans. In fact, diffuse
beta-amyloid plaques may develop in the cerebral cortex
in dogs, but the neurofibrillary tangles seen in humans
have not been reported in dogs.

Clinical presentation
Affected animals show chronic progressive behavioral
abnormalities such as loss of learned behavior, failure to
recognize their owners, and disturbed sleep cycles.

Differential diagnosis
Brain tumor, cerebrovascular disease, metabolic encephalopathy, hypertensive encephalopathy.

Diagnosis
Cognitive disorder is diagnosed by excluding other
causes of the behavioral abnormalities. However, due to
the nonspecific clinical signs associated with this clinical
syndrome, it is difficult to make a definitive diagnosis.
An extensive evaluation for other causes of intracranial
signs in older dogs should be undertaken. Measurement
of the interthalamic adhesion thickness using MRI has
been suggested as a criterion for the confirmation of brain
atrophy in dogs, as it is significantly smaller in older dogs
with cognitive dysfunction.

Management

Management

Currently, there is no effective treatment for degenerative
diseases of the CNS. Symptomatic therapy, such as anticonvulsants and anti-anxiety drugs, can help alleviate clinical signs, but these diseases are inevitably progressive.
Often, helping the owner decide when to elect euthanasia

Diets rich in antioxidants have been useful in slowing
age-related behavioral changes in experimental colonies
of dogs. The use of l-deprenyl has also been advocated.
Antidepressant and anti-anxiety medications may be beneficial in the symptomatic management of some animals.

K22463_C014.indd 553

23/04/16 1:20 pm

554

Diseases of specific organ systems

METABOLIC DISEASES
Numerous metabolic abnormalities may alter cerebrocortical and brainstem function. Liver disease (hepatic
encephalopathy), renal disease (renal encephalopathy),
pancreatic disease (pancreatic encephalopathy), glucose
abnormalities (hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia), electrolyte abnormalities (sodium, potassium, chloride, calcium, magnesium), cardiovascular diseases (resulting
in ischemia and hypoxia), and acid–base abnormalities
are examples of metabolic diseases. Endocrine abnormalities (thyroid hormones and cortisol) may also affect
consciousness.

hepatic encephalopathy
Definition/overview
When liver function is compromised due to organ failure,
hepatic microvascular dysplasia, or portosystemic shunting, CNS signs quickly ensue.

Pathophysiology
Hepatic encephalopathy occurs when numerous putative
neurotoxins reach the brain without being metabolized
as a result of passing through an abnormally functioning liver. Suspected toxins include neurotransmitters
(e.g. gamma-aminobutyric acid [GABA] and glutamate),
aromatic amino acids, and ammonia.

Clinical presentation
Animals with hepatic encephalopathy are most often
admitted for seizures, ptyalism (especially in cats), and
mentation changes, which range from behavioral abnormalities to coma. Signs of hepatic dysfunction, such as
weight loss, polydipsia, anorexia, and vomiting, may be
present. These animals are often sensitive to the administration of benzodiazepines and barbiturates, as both these
types of drug are metabolized by the liver. Overzealous
administration of these drugs may result in stupor and
coma due to CNS depression.

Differential diagnosis
Hydrocephalus, inflammatory CNS diseases, toxicity,
other metabolic encephalopathies.

Diagnosis
The diagnosis of hepatic encephalopathy is supported by
abnormal liver function studies such as bile acid testing
and resting ammonia levels. Other associated abnormalities may include microcytic red blood cells, low albumin, cholesterol, glucose, and urea concentrations, and

K22463_C014.indd 554

elevated liver enzymes if there is parenchymal damage.
The preferred imaging studies to confirm a diagnosis of
portosystemic shunt include mesenteric portography,
abdominal ultrasonography, and per rectal scintigraphy.
Transcranial color-coded duplex ultrasonography and
MRI have also been used to characterize the brain tissue
of animals with hepatic encephalopathy.

Management
Treatment of hepatic encephalopathy aims to:

●● Treat the underlying liver disease.
●● Treat any associated seizures.
●● Reduce the level of hematogenous neurotoxins
(e.g. ammonia) or factors that can increase ammonia
production (e.g. metabolic alkalosis, hypokalemia,
gastrointestinal [GI] bleeding).
A diet of high-quality, low-quantity protein can help
to minimize ammonia production in the gut. Lactulose
(0.5–1.0 ml/kg PO q8h) is frequently used to assist with
this aim as it reduces the amount of colonic ammonia produced and ‘traps’ ammonia by creating an acidic environment within the gut. Lactulose can also be a
­ dministered
as an enema to comatose patients (1–2 ml/kg q4–6h until
loose stool is seen). In addition, neomycin (20 mg/kg PO
q8h), ampicillin (22 mg/kg PO q8h), or metronidazole
(7.5 mg/kg PO q8h) can be given to reduce the number of
­urea-splitting bacteria in the colon. Potassium bromide can
be used in these cases, but requires load-dosing to r­ apidly
attain steady-state levels. The ideal anticonvulsant to use
is levetiracetam (PO, IM or IV). Seizures following s­ urgical
ligation of portosystemic shunts can be especially severe
and difficult to effectively treat. Cautious use of a constant
rate infusion of diazepam or midazolam may be used for
status epilepticus in this situation; however, it can be difficult to dose due to the underlying alterations in liver function. Reduced dosages titrated to effect can be helpful but
require vigilant patient monitoring and assessment.

hypoglycemia
Definition/overview
The neurons in the brain require glucose for energy
metabolism. A decrease in the availability of glucose to
the brain neurons can cause a constellation of clinical
abnormalities.

Etiology
Decreases in the blood glucose level alter intracranial
neuronal function.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

Pathophysiology
Hypoglycemia can occur secondary to insulinoma, liver
disease, hypoadrenocorticism, glycogen storage diseases,
insulin overdose in diabetic animals, toxicity (e.g. xylitol),
infectious diseases, and extrapancreatic neoplasia. Toy
breeds and neonates may become hypoglycemic during
times of stress. Some dogs that undertake significant
exercise (e.g. hunting dogs) and young animals with metabolic stresses (such as caused by a parasitic infestation)
are also at risk of developing hypoglycemia.

Clinical presentation
Hypoglycemia can cause a variety of neurologic signs
including anxiety, a ravenous appetite, lethargy or
depression, tremors, seizures, and coma. Exercise or fasting may precipitate signs. The speed with which the glucose concentration changes influences signs to a certain
extent. A sudden drop in the blood glucose level causes
a sympathetic discharge, hence anxiety and hunger,
whereas a chronically low glucose concentration causes
lethargy. Central blindness is a frequent finding in animals that present with hypoglycemic seizures. This can
be a permanent residual deficit if severe damage has
occurred.

Differential diagnosis
Hydrocephalus, inflammatory CNS diseases, toxicity,
other metabolic encephalopathies.

Diagnosis
Serum glucose concentrations <3.3 mmol/l (<60 mg/dl)
accompanied by consistent neurologic signs are suggestive of significant hypoglycemia. If the glucose level
decreases slowly, some animals can tolerate a lower concentration (<2 mmol/l; <35 mg/dl) without serious clinical problems. Imaging can be used to demonstrate the
presence of a pancreatic mass, which may be one of several types of pathology including insulinoma (beta cell
carcinoma).

Management
Treatment depends on the underlying cause. Feeding
multiple small meals can help dogs with insulinomas.
Direct correction of hypoglycemia is indicated in emergency situations. Syrup can be applied to the gums when
IV access is not available (e.g. by owners). It should be
noted that if the suspected diagnosis is insulinoma,
giving large amounts of glucose, either in the form of a
large meal or IV, can sometimes cause a further increase
in insulin release into the circulation and exacerbate the
problem.

K22463_C014.indd 555

555

ELECTROLYTE DISTURBANCES
sodium abnormalities
Definition/overview
Both hypernatremia and hyponatremia may affect the
CNS and result in abnormalities of mentation.

Etiology
Any cause of an abnormal sodium concentration will
result in neurologic dysfunction. Hypernatremia is most
extreme in animals with abnormalities of thirst and
drinking, which may also be associated with hypothalamic disease.

hypernatremia
Pathophysiology
Hypernatremia is synonymous with h
­yperosmolality
and can lead to shrinkage of the brain parenchymal cells,
which in turn can cause stretching of the small intracranial blood vessels and hemorrhage. After 2–3 days, the
brain attempts to compensate for the altered ­extracellular
sodium level by producing osmotically active i­ ntracellular
substances (idiogenic osmoles). Thus, overly rapid correction of chronic hypernatremia can cause sudden swelling
of the brain parenchyma and ultimately be fatal.

Clinical presentation
The clinical signs of hypernatremia include lethargy and
irritability progressing to ataxia, tremors, myoclonus, seizures, blindness, coma, and death.

Differential diagnosis
Hydrocephalus, inflammatory CNS diseases, toxicity,
other metabolic encephalopathies.

Diagnosis
Demonstration of an abnormal electrolyte level in the
presence of an encephalopathy, which improves with
appropriate correction, confirms the diagnosis.

Management
Guidelines for the treatment of sodium abnormalities
have been suggested but are crude. Appropriate therapy is based on replacement of the water deficit (calculated using the following equation) in conjunction with
addressing the underlying cause:
Water deficit (l) = 0.6 × bodyweight (kg) × (patient’s
sodium concentration/normal sodium concentration -1)

23/04/16 1:20 pm

556

Diseases of specific organ systems

However, calculations such as this are only used as
a guide to begin therapy. With chronic serum sodium
abnormalities, cautious fluid therapy with frequent monitoring for neurologic deterioration is imperative. In an
animal with established hypernatremia, the water deficit should be corrected either orally or by fluid therapy
administered conservatively over 2–3 days. An isotonic
maintenance fluid (such as lactated Ringer’s solution)
should be used, initially at 1.5 times the normal maintenance rate. Serum sodium concentrations should be
monitored every 4–6 hours and the rate of fluid therapy administration adjusted up or down accordingly. If
the serum sodium concentration is lowered too rapidly,
cerebral edema may result, with a clinical deterioration
in consciousness. With slow onset hypernatremia (occurs
over 48 hours or more), the maximal daily decrease with
treatment should not exceed 0.5 mEq/hour or 8–12 mEq/l
per 24 hours.

Sodium deficit (mEq/l) = 0.6 × bodyweight (kg) × (normal
sodium concentration – patient’s sodium concentration)
As for hypernatremia, cautious fluid therapy and
­frequent monitoring are paramount. Too rapid correction of established hyponatremia can result in thalamic
lesions. When hyponatremia has occurred over a period
of >24 hours, treatment is adjusted so that the maximal
increase does not exceed 0.5 mEq/l/hour or 8–12 mEq/l
per 24 hours.

NEOPLASTIC DISEASES
Definition/overview

Hyponatremia is synonymous with hypo-osmolality and
can result in swelling of the brain parenchymal cells with
subsequent edema. After 2–3 days the brain tries to compensate for this by actively extruding osmotically active
intracellular components. As with hypernatremia, rapid
correction of hyponatremia can be fatal.

Brain tumors most commonly affect older dogs and cats.
Brain tumors may arise primarily from the brain or surrounding tissues, extend into the brain from adjacent
structures, or metastasize to the brain from another location in the body. Tumors result in clinical signs either
through primary mechanical damage or as a consequence
of secondary pathophysiologic events such as edema and
hemorrhage.
The median age of dogs diagnosed with a brain tumor
is reported to be 9 years (range: 4–13 years). The most
commonly affected breeds include Golden Retrievers,
Labrador Retrievers, Boxers, Collies, Bulldogs, and Boston
Terriers. The median age at the time of diagnosis of brain
tumors in cats is reported to be 11.3 years (± 3.8 years).

Clinical presentation

Pathophysiology

The clinical signs of hyponatremia include lethargy,
nausea, and vomiting progressing to seizures, coma, and
death.

Tumors of the intracranial space may be primary (arising from tissues in the intracranial space) or secondary
(arising from tissues adjacent to the intracranial space or
from metastasis). Primary intracranial tumors include:

hyponatremia
Pathophysiology

Differential diagnosis
Hydrocephalus, inflammatory CNS diseases, toxicity,
other metabolic encephalopathies.

Diagnosis
Demonstration of an abnormal electrolyte level in
the presence of an encephalopathy, which improves
with appropriate correction, confirms the diagnosis.
T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
(FLAIR) MR images of the thalamic area of the brain
reveal characteristic bilateral hyperintense abnormalities. These abnormalities are often focal and oval.

Management
Appropriate therapy is based on correction of the sodium
deficit (calculated using the following equation) in conjunction with addressing the underlying cause:

K22463_C014.indd 556

●● Meningiomas. The most common brain tumors in
dogs and cats. These tumors arise from the arachnoid
layer of the meninges, originating at the periphery of
the brain parenchyma and expanding inwards.
●● Gliomas. Arise from the supporting cells of the brain
parenchyma. These include astrocytes and oligodendrocytes forming astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, and the extremely malignant glioblastoma
multiforme. Brachycephalic breeds such as Boxers
and Boston Terriers may be more often affected with
these tumors.
●● Ependymomas. Arise from the ependymal lining of
the ventricular system.
●● Choroid plexus tumors. Arise from areas where the
choroid plexus is concentrated (the lateral, third, and
fourth ventricles).

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

●● Pituitary gland tumors. Macroadenomas may enlarge
dorsally from the sella and compress the diencephalon. Neurologic impairment can be surprisingly
minimal. The relative size of the tumor cannot be
predicted from the endocrine test result.
Secondary intracranial lesions arise as a result of metastasis or direct extension from extraneural sites. Numerous
tumors in older animals metastasize to the brain including hemangiosarcomas, lymphomas, and mammary
gland and other carcinomas.

Clinical presentation
Most canine brain tumors affect the forebrain. The most
common presenting complaint in these cases is seizures.
Seizures are sometimes the only sign of a structural
intracranial abnormality, with the remainder of the neurologic examination findings being normal. This is particularly true with more rostral and olfactory lobe lesions.
Otherwise, the clinical signs associated with tumors
affecting the brain depend on the location within the
brain, brainstem, or cerebellum. Disorientation, circling,
ataxia, depression, and CN signs can variably be seen.
Most feline intracranial neoplasia affects the forebrain. The most common neurologic signs include altered
consciousness (depression, stupor, or coma), circling, seizures, ataxia, and behavioral changes.

Differential diagnosis
CNS inflammatory diseases such as granulomatous
meningoencephalomyelitis (GME) and those due to
infections.

Diagnosis
Advanced imaging modalities, such as CT and MRI, are
most commonly used to investigate cases of suspected
neoplasia (Figures 14.8a–h). CT-guided, freehand needle biopsy of brain tumors has been reported in dogs
with intracranial lesions to obtain a histologic diagnosis
prior to treatment. Although CT-guided, freehand needle
biopsy is a relatively safe procedure, the diagnostic yield
can be variable.
An MRI-compatible stereotactic brain biopsy system
has recently been validated for use in dogs. This modified
frameless stereotactic system has been shown to have
acceptable precision for obtaining biopsy samples and
has been used successfully in a clinical setting.
CSF analysis is often not helpful for the definitive
diagnosis of a brain tumor, and in some instances can
even be misleading. Typically, CSF in dogs with a brain
tumor contains an increased level of protein without a

K22463_C014.indd 557

557

concurrent pleocytosis (albuminocytologic ­dissociation).
However, in a significant proportion of these cases
­cellular changes consistent with inflammation are present and, interpreted alone, may falsely suggest a primary
inflammatory disease. Occasionally, CSF in a dog with a
brain tumor is normal. The presence of neoplastic cells in
the CSF is specific; however, it is a very rare finding.

Management
Treatment for brain tumors in dogs depends on tumor
type, location, natural history of the tumor, associated
­morbidity/mortality with the treatment modality, and
cost. While studies of brain tumor treatment in dogs and
cats exist in the veterinary literature, many have incomplete diagnoses, nonstandardized treatment protocols,
lack of a control population, and different tumor types
being grouped together to increase overall case numbers.
These problems make it difficult to make definitive statements regarding treatment efficacy.
Glucocorticoid therapy provides minimal supportive
care for patients with brain tumors, although its use can
often be necessary and helpful. The aims of glucocorticoid treatment are to control the secondary conditions
of acquired hydrocephalus and peritumoral edema, and
to reduce ICP. Clinical signs in many patients improve
following the initiation of steroid treatment, which may
give some indication of tumor invasion and what could be
achieved with surgery.
Surgery is ideal for superficially located, encapsulated,
relatively small benign tumors, of which meningiomas
are the most common example (Figure 14.9). Median
survival times reported in dogs following surgery for
all types of brain tumor vary, but tend to cluster around
140–150 days. For meningiomas, median survival times
may be slightly longer (240 days) and there is evidence that
improving surgical excision using ultrasonic aspiration or
endoscopy does improve survival times. Surgical excision
is more readily accomplished in cats, as ­meningiomas in
this species tend to be well encapsulated and easily delineated from normal brain tissue. Studies have determined
the median survival time in cats ­following meningioma
resection to be between 22 and 27 months.
Conventional radiation therapy has been shown to
be effective for brain tumors in dogs. The main goal of
treatment is to administer the highest possible dose to
the tumor while minimizing the dose to the surrounding
normal tissue. Median survival time in dogs is around 150
to 350 days.
Chemotherapy is used as a primary therapy or as an
adjunct to surgery in selected instances in animals with
brain tumors. Carmustine and lomustine are alkylating

23/04/16 1:20 pm

558

Diseases of specific organ systems

14.8

a

d

b

e

c

f

K22463_C014.indd 558

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

559

14.9

g

Figure 14.9 A lateral rostrotentorial craniectomy is used to
approach the parietal lobe of the brain for the purposes of
tumor resection.

agents that have some effectiveness against gliomas.
Hydroxyurea (30–45 mg/kg PO three times a week, with
monitoring of the blood cell count for evidence of myelosuppression) is gaining popularity for treatment of
meningiomas. There is little to no data available on the
effectiveness of chemotherapy for canine or feline brain
tumors.

INFLAMMATORY INFECTIOUS CNS DISEASES
h
Figures 14.8a–h (a) Post-contrast transverse CT brain scan at
the level of the olfactory bulbs and frontal sinuses. A welldefined contrast-enhanced lesion can be identified (arrow),
which was confirmed to be meningioma on histopathology
following resection. (b) T1-weighted post-contrast midline
sagittal brain MR image depicting a homogeneously enhancing
lesion in the olfactory bulb (arrow), characteristic for a
meningioma. (c) T2-weighted midline sagittal brain MR image
depicting an iso- to hyperintense lesion in the olfactory bulb
(long arrow), which is accompanied by a cystic component
(short arrow), which is well described for meningiomas.
(d) T1-weighted post-contrast midline sagittal brain image
depicting a heterogeneously enhancing lesion in the frontal
lobe characteristic for a glioma, which in this case was an
astrocytoma. (e) T1-weighted post-contrast midline sagittal
brain MR image depicting a heterogeneously enhancing lesion
in the olfactory bulb and the frontal lobe. The lesion was a
nasal adenocarcinoma extending caudally from the nasal cavity.
(f) T2-weighted transverse brain MR image clearly showing a
large well-demarcated heterogeneously hyperintense lesion
causing mass effect (midline shift of the brain). The lesion was
confirmed as an oligodendroglioma. (g) The oligodendroglioma
shown in 14.8f is stained with hematoxylin and eosin.
(h) The oligodendroglioma shown in 14.8f stains positively
immunohistochemically with Olig2.

K22463_C014.indd 559

Definition/overview
Encephalitis and infectious diseases often exist concurrently in dogs and cats.

Etiology
Numerous infectious agents have been implicated:

●● Viral: distemper, parvovirus, parainfluenza, herpes-

●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

virus, feline coronavirus (which causes FIP), West Nile
virus, pseudorabies, and rabies.
Bacterial.
Rickettsial: Rocky Mountain spotted fever and
Ehrlichia.
Fungal: blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, cryptococcosis, coccidioidomycosis, and aspergillosis.
Protozoal: toxoplasmosis and neosporosis.
Unclassified organisms: protothecosis.

Pathophysiology
The specific pathophysiology of the above mentioned infectious diseases in the CNS is discussed below. Inflammation
of the structures of the brain (encephalitis) can co-exist
with inflammation of the meninges (meningitis) and, occasionally, with inflammation of the spinal cord (myelitis).

23/04/16 1:20 pm

560

Diseases of specific organ systems

14.10

Clinical presentation
As a general rule, inflammatory diseases tend to be
acute in onset and progressive, with a multifocal or
diffuse, often asymmetrical, distribution within the
CNS. Neurologic manifestations are quite variable and
reflect the location of the inflammatory foci within
the nervous system. Central vestibular signs are commonly encountered and can be seen alone or in combination with other neurologic signs. Neck pain can also
be present as a manifestation of meningeal inflammation. Animals with CNS infections frequently do not
have evidence of systemic involvement. Therefore, the
absence of fever, anorexia, and depression and the presence of a normal hemogram cannot be used to exclude
the possibility of an infectious etiology in an animal
with neurologic signs.

Differential diagnosis
Sterile causes of CNS inflammatory disease, brain tumor,
metabolic and toxic encephalopathies.

Diagnosis
A thorough ophthalmologic examination should be performed in every neurologic case to look for evidence of
fundic changes or uveitis compatible with inflammatory
disease. Definitive diagnosis of CNS inflammatory disease
is typically based on finding an increased total nucleated
cell count or an abnormal cell type distribution, with a
concomitant increase in protein concentrations, on CSF
analysis. In rare instances, normal CSF can be obtained
from an animal with confirmed CNS inflammatory disease. This can occur if the inflammation does not involve
the meninges or the ependymal lining of the ventricular
system, or if the animal has been treated with cortico­
steroids prior to CSF collection. Elevations in protein concentration can result from breakdown of the blood–brain
barrier or intrathecal antibody production. It is likely that
both of these mechanisms contribute toward the elevated
protein levels recognized with most CNS inflammatory
disease. Cytologic evaluation of the fluid provides additional information as to possible causes (Figure 14.10).
Additional testing, based on the cytologic evaluation,
is performed in an attempt to identify the infectious
cause of the inflammation. These tests can include:

●● CSF culture for bacterial or fungal organisms.
●● Serum and CSF antibody or antigen titers.
●● CSF polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis.
However, despite extensive testing, an underlying cause
for the inflammation is not determined in most cases.

K22463_C014.indd 560

Figure 14.10 Cryptococcus organisms can be seen in this
cytologic analysis from CSF of a dog with seizure episodes.
(Courtesy R. Di Terlizzi)

Management
Treatment is aimed at the primary disease process.
Treatment with clindamycin (10–15 mg/kg PO q12h)
and/or trimethoprim/sulfonamide (15 mg/kg PO q12h)
for potential protozoal infections can be initiated once a
diagnosis of encephalomyelitis has been made based on
CSF results, while additional test results are pending. If
no infectious cause is discovered on additional testing,
or the animal does not respond to initial antimicrobial
therapy, treatment with corticosteroids should be initiated. Anti-inflammatory doses are often effective at alleviating the clinical signs, but higher immunosuppressive
doses may be required in some instances to appropriately manage the immune-mediated disease. Prognosis
is variable and depends on both the cause of the inflammation and the extent and severity of associated neurologic deficits. Some infections, especially those caused
by protozoal and fungal agents, are difficult to eradicate
and relapses are common. In addition, residual neurologic deficits can persist despite successful treatment of
an infection due to irreversible damage caused by the
inciting agent.

rabies
Definition/overview
Rabies is caused by an enveloped RNA neurotropic virus
of the genus Lyssavirus in the family Rhabdoviridae. All
warm-blooded animals are vulnerable to infection with
rabies, but species susceptibility varies tremendously.
Foxes, coyotes, jackals, and wolves are amongst the most
susceptible animals with skunks, raccoons, bats, and cattle also having a high susceptibility.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

Pathophysiology
Infection most often occurs as a result of being bitten by
an infected animal with rabies virus in its saliva. The incubation period is influenced by multiple factors, including patient age, bite site, the variant, and the amount of
virus inoculated. After IM inoculation, the virus enters
the neuromuscular junctions following a variable period
(from days to 6 months) of replication in the local tissues.
The virus rapidly spreads up the peripheral nerves and
then the spinal cord to the forebrain, causing damage to
the nervous tissue en route and resulting in progressive
nervous system signs.

Clinical presentation
There are several overlapping phases during the progression of the disease. In dogs there is usually a prodromal
phase (lasts for 2–3 days) during which clinical signs such
as apprehension, nervousness, anxiety, and variable fever
may be seen. Overall, a significant change in the normal
behavior of the animal is noted by the owner. Affected animals can be seen to constantly lick the site of viral inoculation. Cats may also exhibit this prodromal phase, but it
more commonly consists of erratic behaviour for 1–2 days.
The furious or psychotic form of rabies usually lasts up
to a week in dogs and is manifest by cerebral dysfunction
with exaggerated responses to sound and touch. Affected
animals can bite at imaginary objects or their cage and
become extremely irritable. At this stage they frequently
exhibit generalized tonic–clonic seizure activity, during
which they can die. Occasionally, dogs can exhibit a predeath paralyzed state. Cats typically develop the furious
stage, resulting in unprovoked attacks and appearing
‘disconnected’ from the environment.
The paralytic or dumb form of rabies is often seen
within 2–4 days following the onset of clinical signs and
is manifest by flaccid paralysis. In both dogs and cats, a
bite to the neck or head may more commonly result in CN
dysfunction. Dysphonia, dysphagia, excessive salivation,
and a dropped jaw may be seen, and these clinical signs
are also classed as part of the paralytic form. Coma and
death usually follow these signs within 2–4 days.

561

Particular concern should be raised for animals that are
known to be unvaccinated and that have exhibited clinical signs for <5 days.
There are no antemortem tests sensitive enough to
be consistently reliable for confirming a diagnosis of
rabies, and there are no hematologic or serum biochemical changes characteristic of the disease. CSF analysis
may reveal elevated protein levels and white blood
cell count with a lymphocytic predominance. Serologic
tests are rarely performed because of the low percentage of animals that have time to develop antibodies.
However, a serologic assay can be used to assess vaccine
efficacy.
A direct fluorescent antibody assay test of the nervous tissue can be performed on thin touch impression
smears and is rapid and sensitive for a definitive diagnosis. The most commonly affected areas on examination are the brainstem, hippocampus, cerebrum, and
cerebellum (Figure 14.11). Reverse transcriptase PCR
(RT-PCR) is a relatively new method for rabies diagnosis and is very useful when the sample size is small
(e.g. CSF sample).

Management
There is no specific treatment for this fatal disease.
A dog or cat suspected of contracting the disease
should be quarantined as recommended by the local
heath authorities or euthanized and the brain submitted for examination. Exposure of all healthcare
­providers to the animal and/or its tissues should be
restricted.

14.11

Differential diagnosis
Other infectious and sterile causes of CNS inflammatory disease, brain tumor, metabolic and toxic
encephalopathies.

Diagnosis
Rabies should always be suspected in any animal presenting with neurologic dysfunction and living in an
area known to have a virus reservoir in the local wildlife.

K22463_C014.indd 561

Figure 14.11 Intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies can be seen
within the neuronal cells of a dog with rabies virus infection.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

562

Diseases of specific organ systems

bacterial meningoencephalitis

14.12

Definition/overview
Bacterial infection is a relatively rare cause of
­encephalitis in dogs and cats when compared with other
species.

Etiology
Bacterial infection of the CNS.

Pathophysiology
Bacterial infection of the brain is usually a consequence
of direct extension of infection from the middle ear or
sinuses or a penetrating injury to the skull (surgical or
traumatic). Hematogenous spread can occur less commonly. Both aerobic and anaerobic infections have been
reported. It is possible for the infection to be limited to
the extradural or subarachnoid space, especially following bite wounds, in which case the infection can remain
localized (intracranial empyema or abscess) and signs
might not be so rapidly progressive. Clinical signs are
largely the result of the inflammatory reaction that
­bacteria incite.

Figure 14.12 T1-weighted post-contrast transverse brain MR
image at the level of the bullae reveals extension of otitis
media/interna into the central nervous system (arrow) in an
8-year-old Yorkshire Terrier.

Clinical presentation
Animals can exhibit a variety of signs including
vestibular dysfunction, seizures, cerebellar signs,
­
­paresis, cervical hyperesthesia, and coma. Fever is present in approximately 50% of cases at presentation. The
signs are usually rapidly progressive and frequently
fatal.

Differential diagnosis
Other infectious and sterile causes of CNS inflammatory disease, brain tumor, metabolic and toxic
encephalopathies.

Diagnosis
Routine blood work usually reflects an inflammatory
process, but can be normal. A urine sample should be
cultured if bacterial encephalitis is suspected and blood
cultures are indicated in animals in which there is no
obvious source of infection. Imaging of the brain (CT or
MRI) is helpful to identify defects in the skull and otitis
media/interna (OMI) and can be suggestive of an inflammatory process (Figure 14.12). CSF analysis is the most
useful test. Typically, there is a marked elevation in the
protein level and total nucleated cell count and the majority of cells are degenerate neutrophils. Bacteria may be
visible in the spinal fluid. However, CSF analysis can be
unremarkable or show more nonspecific inflammatory
changes. CSF should be cultured if it contains degenerate

K22463_C014.indd 562

neutrophils, although it is common for the cultures to be
negative.

Management
Treatment with an antibacterial drug that penetrates
the CNS should be initiated while waiting for culture results. The most common bacterial isolates are
Escherichia coli, Streptococcus and Klebsiella, but anaerobic ­infections can also occur. Appropriate drugs include
fluoroquinolones and third-generation cephalosporins.
­
Many patients are in a critical condition and need IV fluids and ­anti-inflammatory drugs. Mechanical ventilation
might be necessary in comatose patients. Prognosis is
poor in animals with rapidly progressing severe signs.
Early appropriate treatment is vital to obtain a good
outcome.

canine distemper virus infection
Definition/overview
Canine distemper is a multisystemic viral disease that
causes multifocal CNS dysfunction. It most commonly
affects unvaccinated dogs.

Etiology
Canine distemper virus (CDV) is a paramyxovirus that
commonly infects the CNS of dogs.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

14.13

563

examination is recommended in all suspected cases, as
many dogs have evidence of chorioretinitis.

Differential diagnosis
Other infectious and sterile causes of CNS inflammatory
disease, brain tumor, metabolic and toxic encephalopathies.

Diagnosis

Figure 14.13 Intranuclear inclusion material in a neuron of a
dog with distemper virus infection. The tissue is stained with
hematoxylin and eosin.

Pathophysiology
The presence and severity of the neurologic signs
depend on factors such as the age and immunocompetence of the host and the neurovirulence of the
virus strain. Many dogs probably develop transient
CNS infections without concurrent clinical signs. In
the CNS, CDV initially replicates in the neurons and
glial cells (Figure 14.13), and can cause both gray and
white matter lesions, with one usually predominating.
These early degenerative lesions are not characteristically inflammatory. A chronic course of CNS infection
results from a late or insufficient immune response to
CDV, with characteristic inflammatory demyelinating
lesions. Polioencephalomyelopathy has been reported
most frequently in immature dogs, while leucoencephalomyelopathy or a combination of both is more common
in mature animals.

Clinical presentation
Seizures, visual deficits, vestibular dysfunction, cerebellar signs, paresis, and myoclonus. The presence of myoclonus is most commonly associated with CDV infection
but is not pathognomonic, as it has been described with
other inflammatory CNS disorders. Neurologic disease
associated with CDV infection tends to have a progressive
course. Disease can develop in well-vaccinated animals,
so previous vaccination history does not exclude the possibility of CDV-associated disease. Systemic signs, such as
respiratory and GI involvement, are reported to precede
the neurologic signs by 2–3 weeks. However, many dogs
have no previous history of disease prior to the onset of
neurologic signs. Extraneural signs include conjunctivitis, rhinitis, fever, respiratory signs, GI signs, tonsillitis,
cachexia, enamel hypoplasia, and hyperkeratosis of the
footpads or nose. These signs are frequently mild. Fundic

K22463_C014.indd 563

An indirect fluorescent antibody test for viral antigen in
conjunctival smears can be positive in many dogs with
CNS distemper, regardless of whether the disease is acute
or chronic. Viral antigen can also be demonstrated in
­tracheal washings and urine sediment. Results of CSF analysis are variable. During the acute stage of the disease, an
inflammatory response is lacking and thus the cell count
and protein levels can be normal. In the chronic stage of
the disease, lymphocytic pleocytosis is more frequently
identified. An elevated CSF titer of antibody against CDV
relative to the serum titer is supportive of a diagnosis.
Biopsy samples of haired skin from the dorsal neck can
be used antemortem for immunohistochemical testing for
acute CDV infection. PCR analysis of urine and CSF samples for CDV has proven most useful in the antemortem
diagnosis of distemper-associated neurologic disease.

Management
There is no specific treatment for CDV-associated ­neurologic
disease. Overall, the prognosis is poor, e­ specially in cases
with rapidly progressive signs. However, some dogs can
survive with residual neurologic deficits. Seizures are
reported to be an unfavorable prognostic sign as they
are often difficult to control with antiepileptic drugs.
Consequently, in cases where the neurologic signs are not
severe, it is recommended that the animal is provided with
supportive care and the disease progression monitored
over 1–2 weeks before considering euthanasia.

feline infectious peritonitis
Definition /overview
FIP is a multisystemic viral disease that causes multifocal
CNS dysfunction.

Etiology
Feline coronavirus is the causative agent of FIP, which is
the most common cause of meningoencephalomyelitis in
cats.

Pathophysiology
The disease occurs most commonly in cats <3 years old
and from multiple cat households; however, cats as old as
15 years have been diagnosed with the disease. Neurologic

23/04/16 1:20 pm

564

Diseases of specific organ systems

14.14

involvement is most common with the noneffusive or ‘dry’
form of the disease. Up to one-third of cats with the noneffusive form of the disease have been reported to have
either primary neurologic FIP or neurologic signs as part
of the overall disease presentation. FIP induces a pyogranulomatous and immune complex-mediated vasculitis
involving the meninges, ependymal lining, periventricular brain tissue, and choroid plexus of the CNS. Secondary
hydrocephalus can be seen due to obstruction of the ventricular system by the inflammation.

Clinical presentation
Neurologic signs include seizures, cerebellar signs,
vestibular dysfunction, and paresis. The disease often
­
has an insidious onset and can lack distinct clinical signs.
Affected cats may have concurrent systemic signs, ­including
anorexia and weight loss. Ocular lesions have also been
identified, including anterior uveitis, iritis, keratic precipitates (Figure 14.14), retinitis, and anisocoria.

Figure 14.14 Ocular feline infectious peritonitis in a cat,
showing keratic precipitates. (Courtesy Ophthalmology Service,
University of Florida)
14.15

Differential diagnosis
Other infectious and sterile causes of CNS inflammatory
disease, brain tumor, metabolic and toxic encephalopathies.

Diagnosis
Hematological findings can include anemia, l­eukocytosis,
and hyperglobulinemia; however, in some affected
cats no abnormalities are present. Serum tests for
­anti-coronavirus antibodies are often positive, but they
have low specificity. In addition, a negative serum titer
(i.e. a complete absence of antibody) does not exclude the
possibility of FIP-associated neurologic disease because
soluble antibodies can form immune complexes and
escape detection by standard tests. Advanced imaging of
the brain often reveals the presence of ventricular dilatation and periventricular contrast enhancement can be
visible with MRI (Figure 14.15). Results of CSF analysis are
variable. The characteristic finding is a marked neutrophilic to pyogranulomatous pleocytosis, with cell counts
often in the hundreds, and an associated increase in
­protein concentration to >200 mg/dl. However, the CSF can
be normal, show a mild mononuclear ­pleocytosis, or have a
normal cell count with an elevated protein c­ oncentration.
Positive CSF titers can be a useful antemortem indicator of
neurologic disease. However, positive antibody titers must
be interpreted with respect to the integrity of the blood–
brain barrier. PCR assays performed on CSF ­samples have
not been shown to be reliable for confirming disease.

Management
Prognosis for cats with CNS FIP is poor. Definitive treatment is not available. The use of immunosuppressive
drugs can slow the progression of disease. Affected

K22463_C014.indd 564

Figure 14.15 T1-weighted transverse brain MR image of a
3-year-old Domestic Shorthair cat with feline infectious
peritonitis; marked enhancement of the lateral ventricular
lining (arrow) is associated with the infection in this cat.

animals should be isolated from other cats to prevent the
spread of infection.

toxoplasmosis and neosporosis
Definition/overview
Toxoplasmosis and neosporosis are multifocal CNS diseases that are relatively uncommon following systemic
infection with Toxoplasma or Neospora.

Etiology
Toxoplasma gondii is an intracellular protozoan parasite
of humans and animals that can cause encephalitis in
infected dogs and cats. Neospora caninum is a protozoan
parasite that is known to cause neurologic disease in dogs
but not cats.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

Pathophysiology
Ingestion of tissue from infected intermediate hosts is the
most common cause of T. gondii infection in dogs and cats.
In the case of N. caninum infection, dogs are commonly
infected in utero, although they can also be infected by
ingestion of intermediate host tissue.

565

cryptococcosis
Definition/overview
Cryptococcus neoformans is the most common fungal
organism that affects the CNS. It occurs more commonly
in cats than in dogs and causes multifocal signs.

Clinical presentation

Etiology

Signs of disease are seen most frequently in young or
immunocompromised animals, and can occur with concurrent CDV infection or FIP. Neurologic signs include
seizures, behavioral changes, CN deficits, cerebellar signs,
and diffuse neuromuscular disease. A progressive cerebellar ataxia has been described in adult dogs with neosporosis. A characteristic early sign of disease is p
­ rogressive
rigidity of one or more limbs as a result of myositis and
neuritis. Concurrent ocular abnormalities can be identified on fundoscopic examination.

Cryptococcus is a saprophytic yeast with a worldwide
distribution. The organism can be isolated from several
sources, although its main reservoir is pigeon droppings.

Differential diagnosis
Other infectious and sterile causes of CNS inflammatory disease, brain tumor, metabolic and toxic
encephalopathies.

Diagnosis
Imaging can reveal the presence of either solitary or
­multiple mass lesions in the brain of affected animals.
CSF analysis typically demonstrates pleocytosis with
a mixed population of neutrophils and the presence
of small and large mononuclear cells. Eosinophils can
also be seen. With toxoplasmosis, a presumptive diagnosis is based on positive antibody titers in the CSF.
However, a ­positive titer can be seen in animals previously exposed to the organism following nonspecific
immune ­stimulation and ­therefore is not definitive evidence of active ­disease. Serum and CSF anti-Neospora
antibody titers are more r­eliable than serum titers
alone. However, for both ­infections, evidence of a rising
titer should be obtained. PCR assays performed on CSF
samples can aid in the a
­ ntemortem diagnosis of these
protozoal infections.

Management
Clindamycin and/or trimethoprim/sulfonamide therapy
for 3–4 weeks is recommended in animals with CNS protozoal infections. Trimethoprim/sulfonamide can be combined with pyrimethamine (0.5–1.0 mg/kg PO q24h for
2 days, then 0.25 mg/kg PO q24h for 2 weeks) and a folic
acid supplement (5 mg/day PO) once the diagnosis has
been confirmed. Neurologic signs typically improve with
treatment but might not resolve because of permanent
damage caused by the organism. In addition, relapses are
possible.

K22463_C014.indd 565

Clinical presentation
Nonspecific signs include anorexia, weight loss, lethargy, lymphadenopathy, and pyrexia. Respiratory signs
include nasal discharge, sneezing, and coughing. Ocular
disease (including anterior uveitis, chorioretinitis, and
retinal detachment) can be seen in association with neurologic signs. Neurologic signs often reflect a diffuse or
multifocal localization and frequently include altered
mentation, CN deficits, and gait abnormalities.

Pathophysiology
Dogs and cats most frequently become infected following inhalation of the organism. Neurologic involvement
results from hematogenous spread or local extension of
an infection through the cribriform plate.

Differential diagnosis
Other infectious and sterile causes of CNS inflammatory disease, brain tumor, metabolic and toxic
encephalopathies.

Diagnosis
MRI findings are variable and include multifocal or
solitary lesions with uniform or peripheral contrast
enhancement (Figures 14.16a, b). Meningeal enhancement can also be observed. A hemogram can reveal the
presence of monocytosis. In animals with extraneural
disease, a definitive diagnosis can often be made based
on cytology and/or culture of urine, nasal discharge,
lymph node aspirates, or cutaneous masses. In addition,
these animals often have positive CSF or serum titers for
cryptococcal capsular antigen. Diagnosis of CNS cryptococcosis can often be made by cytologic evaluation of the
CSF. Neutrophilic, mononuclear, or mixed pleocytosis can
be seen, with neutrophilic pleocytosis most common in
cats. Eosinophils are frequently present. The encapsulated organism can be seen in cytologic preparations in
the majority of cases. The use of India ink, new methylene
blue, or Gram stain allows the organisms to be identified
more readily (Figure 14.17). In cases in which the organism is not observed on cytology, diagnosis can be made

23/04/16 1:20 pm

566

Diseases of specific organ systems

14.16

either by detecting cryptococcal capsular antigen in the
CSF or by culturing CSF samples.

Management
Treatment with amphotericin, fluconazole, or itraconazole is recommended, although overall prognosis is
fair to poor. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) should be administered when antifungal therapy is ­initiated, to counteract the intense inflammatory
reaction that accompanies the killing of Cryptococcus.
­
Long-term treatment is required, ranging from several
months to years. It is difficult to completely rid the body
of the organism and relapses are common. Treatment
should be continued until serum cryptococcal titers are
negative or for 2 months beyond the resolution of clinical
signs.

a

INFLAMMATORY NONINFECTIOUS
CNS DISEASES
Inflammatory, noninfectious causes of CNS dysfunction
in dogs include such diseases as GME and necrotizing
encephalitis. These diseases are often grouped together
antemortem within the term meningoencephalitis of
undetermined etiology.
b
Figures 14.16a, b (a) Midline sagittal T2-weighted MR image of
a dog’s brain with Cryptococcus infection showing a granuloma
adjacent to the cribriform plate in the olfactory bulb (arrow).
(b) Midline sagittal T1-weighted MR image of the same dog
reveals marked meningeal contrast enhancement (arrow)
compatible with inflammation associated with the fungal
infection.
14.17

granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
Definition/overview
GME is an inflammatory disease of unknown etiology
that affects the CNS of dogs and, rarely, cats.

Etiology
The etiology is unknown, although infectious, autoimmune, and neoplastic causes have been proposed.

Pathophysiology
Although the cause of GME is unknown, characteristics
of the lesion suggest a possible immunologic basis for
the disease and an immune-mediated pathogenesis is
suspected

Clinical presentation

Figure 14.17 Brain tissue stained with periodic acid–Schiff to
highlight the fungal bodies in purple (arrow) with the capsular
area shown in white.

K22463_C014.indd 566

The disease is most common in middle aged toy and
small breed dogs, with a possible breed predisposition in Poodles and Terriers. Three clinicopathologic
forms of the disease are described: (1) an ocular form,
which manifests with acute onset of dilated, unresponsive pupils due to optic neuritis; (2) a focal form,
which presents with clinical signs suggestive of a single
space-occupying mass, with areas of predilection in the

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

567

pontomedullary region and forebrain; and (3) a diffuse
form, which presents with clinical signs suggestive of a
multifocal CNS disorder, with the cerebrum, brainstem,
cerebellum, and cervical spinal cord most commonly
involved. Clinical signs are usually acute in onset and
progressive.

lomustine, and azathioprine. Radiation therapy has also
been recommended as a treatment for dogs with the focal
form of the disease. Overall, prognosis is poor, but survival times range from weeks to years. The diffuse form
of the disease carries the worst prognosis, with a survival
time of weeks to months.

Differential diagnosis

necrotizing meningo(leuko)encephalitis

Other infectious and sterile causes of CNS inflammatory disease, brain tumor, metabolic and toxic
encephalopathies.

Definition/overview

Diagnosis
CSF analysis typically reveals a mononuclear pleocytosis with an associated increase in protein concentration. However, both neutrophilic pleocytosis and normal
CSF analysis have been reported. A mass lesion may be
evident on imaging with the focal form of the disease,
while the brain parenchyma can have a patchy, heterogeneous appearance with the diffuse form (Figure 14.18).
A definitive diagnosis can only be made histologically on
postmortem examination or by biopsy. Antemortem diagnosis is usually presumptive, by exclusion of infectious
etiologies.

Management
The most commonly prescribed treatment for GME consists of immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids.
Other immunomodulatory drugs are frequently used in
combination with corticosteroids and include cytosine
arabinoside, cyclosporine, mycophenolate, procarbazine,

Necrotizing meningo(leuko)encephalitis is a chronic
­progressive neurologic disorder reported in Pugs (Pug
encephalitis), Yorkshire Terriers, Chihuahuas, and
Maltese. There are also sporadic reports of similar findings in other small breed dogs, such as the Chihuahua,
Pekingese, and Shih Tzu.

Etiology
The etiology of the disease is unknown.

Pathophysiology
Infection with an alpha-type herpesvirus has been suggested based on histologic similarities with this type of
infection in humans. However, attempts at viral isolation
have been unsuccessful. The disease is associated with
necrosis and a nonsuppurative meningoencephalitis, predominantly in the cortex. The subcortical white matter is
frequently involved (Figure 14.19). Areas of necrosis can
also be seen in the brainstem. Recent research suggests
that genetics may play a role in disease susceptibility in
Pugs.

14.19

14.18

Figure 14.18 Sagittal paramedian T2-weighted brain MR
image of a 2-year-old French Bulldog demonstrating multifocal
hyperintensities confirmed to be GME on histopathology.

K22463_C014.indd 567

Figure 14.19 Transverse T1-weighted brain MR image depicting
a loss of subcortical parenchyma (arrow) associated with
necrotizing meningoencephalitis in a dog.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

568

Diseases of specific organ systems

Clinical presentation
Pug encephalitis is most commonly seen in juvenile
to young adults, and causes seizures and other signs of
forebrain dysfunction. The disease described in Maltese
also has a predilection for the forebrain. The disease
in Yorkshire Terriers causes signs of forebrain and
brainstem involvement. Chihuahuas with necrotizing
meningo­
encephalitis present with neurologic signs,
which include seizures, blindness, mentation changes,
and postural deficits. Multifocal loss or collapse of cortical gray/white matter demarcation is identified on MRI.
Multifocal asymmetrical areas of necrosis or collapse in
both gray and white matter of the cerebral hemispheres
is seen on post mortem.

Differential diagnosis
Other infectious and sterile causes of CNS inflammatory disease, brain tumor, metabolic and toxic
encephalopathies.

Diagnosis
CT may reveal a focal hypodense area within the brain
parenchyma relating to the area of necrosis. Multifocal,
asymmetrical areas of high signal intensity in the brain
can be seen on T2-weighted MR images, with variable
contrast enhancement of the parenchyma and meninges
visible on T1-weighted images. A lymphocytic pleocytosis
is most frequently recognized on CSF analysis. A definitive diagnosis is based on histopathology.

Management
Prognosis is poor and the disease is typically fatal.
Combined immunosuppressive protocols similar to those
utilized for the treatment of GME are recommended. As
with GME, there is limited information on the efficacy
of such treatments in cases of histologically confirmed
disease.

NUTRITIONAL DISEASES (THIAMINE
DEFICIENCY)
Definition/overview
Thiamine deficiency is a rare problem in dogs and cats
that results in an acute progressive multifocal disease of
the brain.

Etiology
Thiamine must be provided in the diet, as dogs and cats
are unable to produce it endogenously. Fish is high in thiaminase, and feeding an all-fish diet to cats can lead to
thiamine deficiency. Overcooking canned food or meat,

K22463_C014.indd 568

causing heat destruction of thiamine, has led to thia­mine
deficiency in dogs. Feeding meat preserved with sulfur dioxide to dogs and cats may also result in thiamine
deficiency.

Pathophysiology
Thiamine (vitamin B1) is a necessary cofactor for normal carbohydrate oxidation, and its deficiency results in
insufficient ATP production in the brain with subsequent
neuronal dysfunction and death (if not treated).

Clinical presentation
Neurologic dysfunction due to thiamine deficiency tends
to be acute and rapidly progressive. In both dogs and
cats, signs of neurologic dysfunction due to thiamine
deficiency typically include vestibular ataxia, decreased
mentation (obtundation leading to coma, if not treated),
ventroflexion of the head and neck, seizure activity,
pupillary dilation with absent menace responses, and
head tremors (Figures 14.20a, b). Left untreated, affected
animals progress to a comatose state with opisthotonus
(decerebrate posture) and ultimately death.

Differential diagnosis
CNS inflammatory disease, cerebrovascular disease,
toxicity.

Diagnosis
Antemortem diagnosis of thiamine deficiency is typically
based on characteristic clinical signs of thiamine deficiency in a dog or cat receiving a thiamine-deficient diet.
A positive response to thiamine administration also supports the diagnosis. Elevated blood pyruvate and lactate
levels and decreased erythrocyte transketolase activity
are supportive of the diagnosis, but these tests are rarely
done. There are reports of MR imaging in dogs with thiamine deficiency; similar to other metabolic encephalopathies, bilaterally symmetric brain lesions (hyperintense
on T2-weighted images) were evident. In animals that die
because of thiamine deficiency, characteristic bilaterally
symmetric lesions (petechial hemorrhages) are appreciable throughout the brain at necropsy, especially in the
caudal colliculi of the midbrain.

Management
Treatment of suspected thiamine deficiency is with
IM or SC thiamine hydrochloride. Rapid IV injection of
thiamine can cause an acute anaphylactoid reaction,
therefore this route of administration is contraindicated. Anaphylactoid reactions are still possible, albeit
more unlikely, with the IM and SC routes. The dosage is

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

14.20

569

owner. Many dogs and cats can recover from severe brain
­injuries if systemic and neurologic abnormalities that
can be treated are identified early enough.

Etiology
Common causes of head injuries in cats and dogs include
road traffic accidents, falls, kicks, gunshot or pellet
wounds, and bites from larger animals. Traumatic injuries
to the brain may result from blunt or penetrating insults;
most canine head trauma results from blunt vehicular
trauma, while most feline head trauma is a
­ ssociated with
crush injury.
a

b
Figures 14.20a, b (a) A 7-year-old Domestic Shorthair cat
exhibiting ventroflexion associated with its thiamine deficiency.
(b) Transverse T2-weighted brain MR image of a dog with
thiamine deficiency depicting bilateral hyperintensities
associated with the colliculi (arrows).

5–50 mg/day for dogs and 1–20 mg/day for cats. If recognized and treated early, prognosis for survival of thiamine deficiency is good. If not treated rapidly in the early
period of neurologic dysfunction, prognosis for survival
is guarded to poor.

HEAD TRAUMA
Definition/overview
Severe head trauma is associated with high mortality
in animals. The appropriate therapy for head trauma
patients remains controversial in veterinary medicine
due to a lack of objective information on the treatment
of dogs and cats with head injuries. Treatment of affected
animals must be immediate if the animal is to recover
to a level that is both functional and acceptable to the

K22463_C014.indd 569

Pathophysiology
Head trauma pathophysiology can be divided into primary and secondary injury. Primary injury to the brain
cannot be reversed, occurs immediately, and describes
the physical disruption of brain tissue; this includes
contusions, hematomas, lacerations, and diffuse axonal
injury leading to vasogenic edema. The underlying vascular and cellular pathophysiology of head trauma is
similar to that described for spinal cord trauma, but is
complicated by elevations in ICP. This secondary injury
is delayed and progressive, potentially providing targets
for treatment. In addition to excitatory neurotransmitter release, ATP depletion resulting in cytotoxic edema,
intracellular calcium accumulation causing activation of
intracellular enzyme systems, and oxygen radical production resulting in lipid peroxidation occur. Traumatic
brain injury is associated with a marked inflammatory
response. The secondary injury ‘cascade’ is exacerbated
by systemic abnormalities present in the patient, which
include hypotension, hypoxia, hypo- or hyperglycemia,
hypo- or hypercapnia, and hyperthermia.
After head trauma, the volume of the brain tissue
compartment increases, usually due to edema or hemorrhage. As the brain tissue compartment increases, the
CSF and the blood compartments must decrease or ICP
will increase. Compensation for increased brain tissue
volume initially involves the translocation of CSF out
of the skull; this is followed by decreased production of
CSF and, eventually, decreased cerebral blood flow. These
compensatory mechanisms prevent increases in ICP for
an undetermined period. Once the ability for compensation is exhausted, a further small increase in intracranial volume will result in dramatic elevations of ICP,
with the immediate onset of clinical signs. Increases in
ICP are often responsible for clinical decline after head
trauma. Marked increases in ICP lead to an elevation of
mean arterial blood pressure (MABP) and reflex bradycardia (Cushing reflex). In addition to a drop in heart rate

23/04/16 1:20 pm

570

Diseases of specific organ systems

coupled with an elevated MABP, other clinical manifestations of ICP elevation include anisocoria, miosis, mydriasis, altered mentation, and loss of motor function with the
development of vertical nystagmus and extensor rigidity
toward the end stages.

Differential diagnosis
Cerebrovascular disease, toxicities.

Diagnosis
Imaging of the patient’s head is often indicated, especially in animals that fail to respond to aggressive medical therapy or deteriorate after initially responding. Skull
radiographs are unlikely to reveal clinically useful information about brain injury but may occasionally reveal
evidence of calvarial fractures (Figures 14.21a–f). CT is
the preferred modality for imaging the head in cases
of severe head injury associated with fractures. Even
patients with ‘mild’ head trauma can exhibit abnormalities on the CT scan and so the initial decision to image
the patient’s head should not be based on the neurologic
examination alone. CT image acquisition time is faster
and often less expensive than MRI, and CT also demonstrates bone detail better than MRI. However, MRI has
been shown to provide key information relevant to the
prognosis based on its ability to detect subtle parenchymal damage not evident on CT imaging. The detection of
midline parenchymal shift and ventricular obliteration
on MR images is associated with a poor prognosis for
survival, based on a recent canine study. Furthermore,
lesions of the intracranial structures that may benefit
from surgical therapy, such as hematomas and pneumocephalus, can be accurately identified using advanced
imaging. Cervical spinal radiographs are also advised
at the time of any skull imaging to rule out concurrent
spinal lesions. As for spinal trauma (see below), thoracic
radiographs will help to evaluate for evidence of thoracic
and cardiac trauma.

Management
A detailed assessment is important for determining
the way in which treatment is tailored to the individual patient. Systemic and neurologic assessment must
be undertaken rapidly and continually reassessed. In
humans, traumatic brain injury is graded as mild, moderate, or severe on the basis of an objective scoring system
(e.g. GCS). A modification of the GCS has been proposed for
use in veterinary medicine. The modified scoring system
incorporates three categories of the examination (level of
consciousness; motor activity; brainstem reflexes), which

K22463_C014.indd 570

are assigned a score from 1 to 6, providing a total score
of 3 to 18, with the best prognosis being the higher score.
The most important consideration in head injury is
maintenance of cerebral perfusion by treatment of hypotension and elevated ICP.
The basic goal of fluid management of head trauma
cases is to maintain a normovolemic to slightly hypervolemic state to ensure an adequate cerebral perfusion
pressure. Initial resuscitation usually involves IV administration of hypertonic saline and/or synthetic colloids.
Use of these solutions allows rapid restoration of blood
volume and pressure while limiting the volume of fluid
administered. In contrast, crystalloids will extravasate
into the interstitium within an hour of administration
and thus larger volumes are required for restoration
of blood volume. If isotonic crystalloids are chosen for
administration (appropriate in mild head trauma), an
­aliquot of the shock dose (90 ml/kg in the dog and 60 ml/kg
in the cat) can be given rapidly and repeated until
improved tissue perfusion is achieved. Hypertonic saline
administration (4–5 ml/kg over 2–5 minutes; 4 ml/kg of
7.5% or 5.3 ml/kg of 3%) draws fluid from the interstitial
and intracellular spaces into the intravascular space,
which improves blood pressure and cerebral blood pressure and flow, with a subsequent decrease in ICP. Colloid
solutions can be administered after hypertonic saline
is used to maintain the intravascular volume, possibly
due to retention of fluids in the intravascular compartments, maintaining an intravascular oncotic gradient.
The ­co-administration of hypertonic solutions and colloids is more effective at restoring blood volume than
either alone. A dose of 4 ml/kg total of a 1:2 combination
of 23.4% hypertonic saline with 6% hydroxyethyl starch
(Hetastarch) has been recommended.
Osmotic diuretics are very useful in the treatment
of intracranial hypertension. Use of mannitol is recommended once vascular volume has been stabilized.
Mannitol has an immediate plasma-expanding effect,
which reduces blood viscosity, increasing cerebral blood
flow and oxygen delivery. This results in vasoconstriction within a few minutes, causing an almost immediate decrease in ICP. The better known osmotic effect of
mannitol reverses the blood–brain osmotic gradient,
thereby reducing extracellular fluid volume in both
normal and damaged brain. Mannitol should be administered as a bolus over a 15-minute period, rather than
as an infusion, in order to obtain the plasma-expanding
effect; its effect on decreasing brain edema takes approximately 15–30 minutes to establish and lasts between 2
and 8 hours. Doses of 0.5–2.0 g/kg appear to be equally

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

571

14.21

a

b

d
c

e

f

Figures 14.21a–f (a) T1-weighted transverse MR image of a dog 24 hours following a head trauma. A linear fracture of the skull
associated with the orbit (arrow) can be seen. Multifocal areas of parenchymal damage can be identified within the frontal lobes.
(b) T2-weighted transverse MR image of the dog in 14.21a. In addition to the parenchymal damage, a focal area of soft tissue
damage can be seen on the dorsum of the head as a hyperintensity (arrow). (c) T2-weighted FLAIR MR image suppressing free fluid
seen on the T2-weighted image and highlighting pathologic hyperintensities alone. (d) Transverse gradient echo MR image detailing
hemorrhage and bone as black, making both easier to determine in comparison with the other sequences. (e) Transverse skull CT
scan of a cat following a bite on the head. A small nondepressed fracture of the skull can be made out (arrow) with this modality,
although underlying parenchymal damage is difficult to discern. (f) 3-D reconstruction of a dog with a depressed skull fracture.

K22463_C014.indd 571

23/04/16 1:20 pm

572

Diseases of specific organ systems

effective in lowering ICP, but the duration of effect is
shorter with the lower doses.
Oxygen supplementation is recommended for most
acutely brain injured animals. Supplemental oxygen
should be administered initially via flow by, as oxygen
cages are usually ineffective because constant monitoring of the patient does not allow for a closed system. As
soon as possible, nasal oxygen catheters or transtracheal
oxygen catheters should be used to supply a 40% inspired
oxygen concentration with flow rates of 100 ml/kg/minute and 50 ml/kg/minute, respectively.

CRANIAL NERVE DISEASES
HEAD TILT AND NYSTAGMUS
Definition/overview
Head tilt and nystagmus are relatively common presentations typically associated with vestibular disease
(Figure 14.22). A thorough neurologic evaluation is critical to successful management. By determining the location of the disturbance within the vestibular system, a
list of differential diagnoses and a diagnostic plan can be
formulated.
14.22

Etiology
For peripheral vestibular disease, OMI, idiopathic vestibular disease, hypothyroidism, toxicity, trauma, and
neoplasia should be considered. For central vestibular
disease, CNS inflammation, cerebrovascular accident,
neoplasia, hydrocephalus, trauma, metronidazole toxicity, thiamine deficiency, and lysosomal storage diseases
should be considered.

Pathophysiology
The vestibular system functions to maintain an animal’s
balance and orientation with respect to gravity. The system detects linear acceleration and rotational m
­ ovement
of the head, and is responsible for maintaining the
­position of the eyes, trunk, and limbs in reference to the
position of the head. The sensory receptors for ­vestibular
input are located in the membranous labyrinth of the
inner ear. Input from the receptors enters the brain via the
vestibular portion of CN VIII, where the majority of fibers
terminate in one of four vestibular nuclei. The remaining axons terminate in the cerebellum. Pathways from
the vestibular nuclei project to the nuclei of CNs III (oculomotor), IV (trochlear), and VI (abducent) to ­control eye
movements, as well as to other brainstem centers and
the cerebellum, cerebral cortex, and spinal cord. A head
tilt results from the loss of anti-gravity muscle tone on
one side of the neck. Jerk nystagmus develops from the
dysfunction of the pathways responsible for integrating
vestibular input with the extraocular eye muscles.

Clinical presentation
Head tilt is described as a rotation of the head about the
first cervical vertebra such that one of the ears is held
lower than the other. Head tilt is indicative of vestibular
disease and is the most consistent sign of a unilateral
vestibular deficit. Nystagmus is a term used to denote
the involuntary rhythmic oscillation of the eyeballs; the
eye movements have a slow phase in one direction and
a rapid recovery in the opposite direction, which can be
horizontal, rotary, or vertical in character. Other clinical
signs of vestibular dysfunction include ataxia, a widebased stance, circling, leaning, falling or rolling toward
the side of the head tilt, and positional strabismus, where
the eye on the affected side deviates ventrally or ventrolaterally when the head is elevated. Animals with acute
vestibular disease can present with anorexia or vomiting
associated with the disequilibrium.

Differential diagnosis
Figure 14.22 An 8-year-old Domestic Shorthair cat with a leftsided head tilt.

K22463_C014.indd 572

The differential diagnoses for an animal with vestibular
disease vary considerably depending on whether the vestibular deficits are determined to be central or peripheral

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

in origin. The two most common disease processes that
cause central vestibular signs are neoplasia and infection/inflammation, while the two most common diagnoses in animals with peripheral vestibular signs are OMI
and idiopathic vestibular disease.

Diagnosis
A CBC, blood chemistry, thyroid panel, and urinalysis
should be performed in all animals presenting with vestibular signs. This can be useful for identifying potential
inflammatory or metabolic disturbances that might be
responsible for the clinical signs, in addition to serving
as a general health screen, because further diagnostic
testing usually requires anesthesia. Blood pressure measurements should also be obtained, as hypertension can
manifest as vestibular dysfunction. An animal found
to have peripheral vestibular disease should undergo a

573

thorough otoscopic examination, performed under anesthesia, along with radiographs of the tympanic bullae to
assess for OMI. It should be noted that normal radiographs
do not rule out OMI. If there is evidence of OMI, a sample
of fluid should be obtained via myringotomy and submitted for cytology and bacterial culture. CT and MRI of the
tympanic bullae are the most sensitive means of identifying fluid within the middle ear, and can be considered
in cases posing a diagnostic challenge (Figures 14.23a–c).
If the equipment is available, hearing can be assessed
using a brainstem auditory evoked response to evaluate
for involvement of the cochlear branch of CN VIII. Cats
should undergo a thorough pharyngeal examination to
check for possible inflammatory polyps. Diagnostic testing in an animal found to have central vestibular disease
should include advanced imaging of the brain (preferably
MRI) to identify any structural abnormalities. Analysis of
14.23

b

a
Figures 14.23a–c (a) Ventrodorsal radiograph of a cat with a
right-sided head tilt. There is increased bone density associated
with the osseous bulla on the right side (arrow), compatible
with middle ear disease. (b) Transverse CT scan of the cat in
14.23a at the level of the osseous bullae. Soft tissue opacity
(arrow) can be seen within both of the cat’s middle ear cavities
on the right side, accompanied by increased bone density.
(c) Transverse T2-weighted MR image of the same cat at the
level of the bullae confirming abnormal signal within the
middle (arrow) and external ear cavities. The cat had a severe
otitis media/interna, which had extended from the external ear
canal and resulted in peripheral vestibular signs.

K22463_C014.indd 573

c

23/04/16 1:20 pm

574

Diseases of specific organ systems

CSF collected from the cerebellomedullary cistern can also
be helpful. Serologic ± CSF testing for potential infectious
agents is indicated where CSF testing shows inflammation.

Management
Treatment options for vestibular dysfunction are determined by the underlying etiology. Supportive care should
consist of administering IV fluids to animals that are
vomiting and confining the animal to a well-padded area
in order to minimize self-trauma secondary to disorientation. Meclizine or maropitant can be given to treat nausea.

PERIPHERAL VESTIBULAR DISEASES
idiopathic vestibular disease
Definition/overview
Idiopathic vestibular disease is a common cause of vestibular disturbance in both dogs and cats.

Etiology
The cause of idiopathic vestibular disease is unknown.

Pathophysiology
Idiopathic vestibular disease is characterized by the acute
or even peracute onset of nonprogressive peripheral vestibular signs, which has been associated with inflammation of the membranous labyrinth of the semicircular
canals.

Clinical presentation
The clinical signs most commonly reflect unilateral
involvement of the peripheral vestibular system and can
be quite severe and acute at onset. Occasionally, bilateral
disease is seen, especially in cats. In contrast with many
of the other diseases that affect the peripheral vestibular
system, facial paresis and Horner’s syndrome are not features of idiopathic vestibular disease.

Differential diagnosis
OMI, ototoxicity, trauma, aural neoplasia, hypothyroidism, nasopharyngeal polyps.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the presence of a compatible history
and physical examination findings and by the exclusion
of other causes of peripheral vestibular disease, particularly OMI. Typically, improvement in clinical signs is seen
within 2–3 days without specific treatment, and this can
be used to help confirm the diagnosis.

K22463_C014.indd 574

Management
No treatment is recommended aside from supportive
care, which consists of administering IV fluids to animals
that are vomiting and confining the animal to a well-­
padded area in order to minimize self-trauma secondary
to disorientation. Meclizine or maropitant can be given to
treat nausea. Prognosis is good as the condition resolves
on its own within 2–4 weeks in dogs and 4–6 weeks in
cats. A mild residual head tilt or ataxia can persist in
some animals.

otitis media/interna
Definition/overview
OMI is one of the more commonly recognized causes of
peripheral vestibular disease in both dogs and cats.

Etiology
OMI is caused by bacterial infection of the middle and
inner ear.

Pathophysiology
OMI typically develops as an extension of otitis
externa (OE), with common bacterial isolates including Staphylococcus intermedius and Pseudomonas spp.
OMI can occur in the absence of OE, in which case it is
believed to be due to ascent of bacteria from the oral cavity through the auditory tube or hematogenous spread.

Clinical presentation
Evidence of OE can be apparent on general physical examination. Facial nerve paralysis, neurogenic keratoconjunctivitis sicca, and/or Horner’s syndrome can be seen
in association with the vestibular signs, due to the close
association of CN VII and the sympathetic supply with the
petrous temporal bone. Disease is most frequently unilateral, but bilateral disease can also occur.

Differential diagnosis
Idiopathic vestibular disease, ototoxicity, trauma, aural
neoplasia, hypothyroidism, nasopharyngeal polyps.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on a thorough otoscopic examination
and imaging of the tympanic bullae. Radiography of the
tympanic bullae can reveal evidence of fluid density
within, and sclerosis of, the bulla. However, radiographs
can be normal in some cases, particularly early in the
course of disease, and thus additional imaging techniques such as CT or MRI might be required to ­provide

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

more sensitive imaging of the bone and soft tissue in the
affected area. Any exudate noted in the external ear canal
should be removed by gentle saline irrigation to v
­ isualize
the tympanic membrane. The tympanic ­
membrane is
­frequently ruptured; if it is intact, it can appear to be
bulging into the external ear canal. If fluid is visualized
within the middle ear, an attempt should be made to
obtain a sample via myringotomy. This can be performed
under general anesthesia by inserting a 22-gauge spinal
­needle or tomcat catheter through the ventral aspect of
the t­ympanic membrane, using an otoscope for guidance. The fluid present can then be gently aspirated
into a syringe and submitted for cytology and bacterial
culture.

Management

575

Pathophysiology
Nasopharyngeal polyps originate in the auditory tube or
the lining of the tympanic cavity and grow passively into
the nasopharynx or middle ear of cats and, very rarely,
dogs. OMI can be a complication of auditory tube obstruction by the polyp.

Clinical presentation
Polyps can cause signs of upper respiratory disease and
dysphagia in addition to peripheral vestibular dysfunction. Evidence of otitis externa is often present.

Differential diagnosis
Idiopathic vestibular disease, OMI, ototoxicity, trauma,
aural neoplasia, hypothyroidism.

The treatment for bacterial OMI consists of a 4–6-week (at
least) course of systemic antibacterial drugs. The choice
of drugs should be based on the results of culture and
sensitivity testing (if samples are successfully obtained
via myringotomy). Otherwise, a drug that is effective
against the most common causative organisms and penetrates the tympanic bullae (e.g. amoxicillin/clavulanate,
a cephalosporin, or a fluoroquinolone) should be chosen.
Otic cleansing products should not be used, particularly
if the tympanic membrane initially cannot be visualized.
If cleansing products escape into the middle ear, they can
worsen the vestibular signs and cause deafness. Prognosis
is good for resolution of the infection, although neurologic deficits can persist after effective medical therapy
due to irreversible damage to the neural structures. Cases
that are unresponsive to medical therapy might require
surgical drainage and débridement via bulla osteotomy.
Occasionally, an infection can extend into the cranial
vault, causing central rather than peripheral vestibular
signs to predominate. Aggressive management, including
surgical drainage of the tympanic bulla and cranial vault
via a bulla osteotomy and appropriate drug therapy, can
result in a favorable outcome in such cases.

Diagnosis

nasopharyngeal polyps

Peripheral vestibular dysfunction can occur secondary to
administration of several systemic or topical medications.

Definition/overview

Diagnosis is based on visualizing the polyp in the nasopharynx or external ear canal during a thorough pharyngeal and otoscopic examination performed under
anesthesia. Radiography can reveal occlusion of the
nasopharynx or sclerosis and soft tissue opacity within
the tympanic bulla. Advanced imaging can provide additional information on the extent of soft tissue involvement associated with the polyp.

Management
Treatment involves removal of the polyp. Many polyps are
attached to the auditory tube by a narrow stalk of tissue
and this can be successfully removed with simple traction. More extensive polyps may require surgical removal
via ventral bulla osteotomy. Horner’s syndrome is a com­
mon postoperative complication ­following ventral
bulla
­osteotomy, but tends to be transient. Overall, the prognosis is good. However, recurrence is possible, especially for
­polyps removed non-surgically.

Ototoxicity
Definition/overview

Nasopharyngeal (inflammatory) polyps comprise
well-vascularized fibrous tissue lined by epithelium.
Disease is identified most frequently in cats from 1 to 5
years of age but has been reported in dogs.

Etiology

Etiology

Prolonged therapy for >2 weeks with high doses of the
drug are necessary to induce changes in normal animals; however, animals with renal impairment are more

These benign polyps are usually secondary to inflammation of the Eustachian tube.

K22463_C014.indd 575

Systemic administration of aminoglycosides is most commonly associated with ototoxicity.

Pathophysiology

23/04/16 1:20 pm

576

Diseases of specific organ systems

susceptible to developing toxicity. Of the ­aminoglycosides,
streptomycin is most often associated with damage to
the vestibular system. Due to the potential for ototoxicity, ­topical otic preparations should never be introduced
into the ear when the tympanic membrane cannot be
­visualized or is found to be ruptured.

Pathophysiology

Clinical presentation

Initial clinical signs include anorexia and vomiting, and
can progress rapidly to include bilateral central vestibular signs with either a symmetrical or asymmetrical generalized ataxia and a positional vertical nystagmus. Head
tilt and seizures are observed less frequently. The onset
of clinical signs can occur as soon as 3 days after initiating treatment but can also be seen following chronic
therapy.

Ototoxic agents can affect vestibular function, hearing,
or both. Other agents can induce ototoxicity when used
topically, the most notable of which are the iodophors and
chlorhexidine.

Differential diagnosis
Idiopathic vestibular disease, OMI, nasopharyngeal polyps, trauma, aural neoplasia, hypothyroidism.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the acute onset of compatible clinical signs in an animal that has recently been administered an ototoxic agent, in addition to the exclusion of
other causes. Deafness can be confirmed with brainstem
auditory evoked response testing.

Management
No definitive treatment is possible. Vestibular signs
usually improve over time due to resolution of the
­
damage or compensatory mechanisms, but deafness
­
tends to be permanent.

CENTRAL VESTIBULAR DISEASES (SEE ALSO
OTHER CAUSES OF BRAIN DISEASE)
metronidazole toxicity
Definition/overview
Central vestibular signs have been reported in dogs (and
rarely in cats) following administration of metronidazole.

Etiology
Dogs reported to have developed metronidazole toxicity were typically treated with an oral dose of >60 mg/
kg/day, although doses as low as 30 mg/kg/day have
been incriminated. Metronidazole toxicity has also been
reported in cats, but affected animals display signs of
forebrain and cerebellar involvement rather than vestibular signs. Toxicity can be seen with lower doses than
those reported for dogs.

K22463_C014.indd 576

The pathogenesis is poorly understood, but it is hypothesized to be related to the interaction of metronidazole
with GABA receptors in the cerebellum and vestibular
nuclei.

Clinical presentation

Diagnosis
A history of metronidazole administration and compatible clinical signs should lead to a high suspicion for this
disorder.

Management
Treatment consists of discontinuation of the drug and
provision of nursing care. In addition, administration
of diazepam (0.5 mg/kg IV followed by 0.5 mg/kg PO
q8h for 3 days has been recommended) has been shown
to shorten recovery times in dogs. Recovery is typically
seen within 1–3 days in dogs treated with diazepam and
within 2–3 weeks in dogs for which treatment only consists of drug discontinuation and supportive care. As with
dogs, clinical signs in cats are reversible with discontinuation of the drug.

DROPPED JAW
Definition/overview
Weakness of the jaw muscles may manifest as a reduction
in voluntary movement of the jaw causing dysphagia or a
complete loss of jaw muscle tone and inability to close the
mouth (Figure 14.24).

Etiology
The cause of dropped jaw is a bilateral lesion affecting
the motor component of CN V (trigeminal nerve). Most
commonly this is due to idiopathic trigeminal nerve
palsy, which is thought to be a neuritis of unknown
cause. Lymphoma and immune-mediated inflammatory
diseases are less common differentials that should be
considered.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

Pathophysiology
The inability to close the mouth implies a bilateral lesion
affecting the motor component of CN V, since a unilateral lesion does not cause sufficient weakness to prevent
mouth closure. The bilateral nature of the trigeminal
lesion strongly implies that it involves the peripheral
nerves rather than the brainstem (since a lesion in the
brainstem large enough to affect both trigeminal nuclei
would likely be fatal). The motor neurons of CN V are
located in the pons near the rostral cerebellar peduncles
and their axons are distributed to the muscles of mastication by the mandibular branch of CN V.
It is important to differentiate a lesion affecting only
CN V from one affecting multiple CNs since both may
cause an animal to drool. This can be achieved by examining the animal’s ability to use its tongue and swallow
food when its mouth is held partially closed; these functions are mediated by CN XII (hypoglossal nerve) and
CN IX (glossopharyngeal nerve), respectively, which are
not affected by an isolated motor trigeminal neuropathy. Apparent inability to close the mouth must also be
distinguished from an unwillingness to close the mouth,
which can be caused by painful conditions of the head,
such as masticatory muscle myositis, retrobulbar lesions,
temporomandibular joint disease, or craniomandibular
osteopathy.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of idiopathic trigeminal neuritis is made
largely through recognition of the typical pattern of clinical signs, absence of any other neurologic disease, and

577

allowing a period of time to elapse in which recovery can
occur. MRI and CSF can be helpful to rule out other causes.

Management
Treatment of idiopathic trigeminal neuritis is supportive:
helping the animal to eat by offering boluses of soft food
and assisting with drinking, or the placement of a temporary feeding tube. It has been suggested that holding
the mouth partially closed with a muzzle facilitates eating and drinking during recovery. Most animals recover
rapidly and are able to eat unassisted within 3 weeks.

ATROPHY OF THE MASTICATORY MUSCLES
Definition/overview
Masticatory muscle atrophy can occur bilaterally or
unilaterally (Figure 14.25). In spite of dramatic muscle
atrophy, the ability to close the mouth usually appears
unimpaired. However, opening the mouth may be very
limited in cases in which there has been muscle inflammation and subsequent fibrosis.

Etiology
Masticatory muscle atrophy can result from impaired
muscle innervation due to lesions of the motor branch
of CN V, diseases of the muscles themselves, or systemic

14.25

14.24

Figure 14.24 A 7-year-old Greyhound with an acute onset of
dropped jaw.

K22463_C014.indd 577

Figure 14.25 Bilateral temporal muscle atrophy is seen in this
dog with generalized masticatory muscle atrophy.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

578

Diseases of specific organ systems

disorders such as cachexia or hyperadrenocorticism (or
exogenous steroid administration). Unilateral loss of temporal muscle mass can occur in the absence of any sensory signs; it is recognized that nerve sheath tumors may
be responsible.

Pathophysiology
Bilateral atrophy can be caused by many systemic
­diseases, most notably cachexia (associated with cancer) and hyperadrenocorticism (associated with exogenous or endogenous corticosteroids). However, bilateral
atrophy most commonly occurs as a consequence of
masticatory myositis due to the destruction of muscle
fibers and scarring, which can occur rapidly. This is an
immune-­mediated disorder in which ­antibody-directed
inflammation is targeted at the muscles of mastication,
including the masseter, temporalis, and pterygoid muscles. The specific antigen is part of the unique myofiber
(type 2M) contained within these muscles. There is no
gender predisposition documented for masticatory myositis and breeds noted to have a predisposition include
the German Shepherd Dog, Hungarian Vizsla, and
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel. Most affected dogs are of
large breeds and are often young adults; cats are infrequently affected.

Clinical presentation
Atrophy of the masticatory muscles can occur unilaterally or bilaterally. Bilateral atrophy is not associated with
failure to close the mouth, but some individuals exhibit
limited mouth opening (trismus). Third eyelid protrusion may follow severe temporal and masseter muscle
atrophy, resulting in enophthalmos (due to loss of muscle support to the orbit), which may be sufficiently severe
to impair vision. Swelling of the muscles of mastication
can occur in the acute phase of masticatory myositis with
trismus and exophthalmos. Palpation of the muscles or
attempting to open the jaws may cause pain, and occasionally a ‘locked jaw’ syndrome can result, in which
animals are unable to either open or close their mouth.
Exophthalmos in the absence of masticatory muscle
swelling can result from myositis of the extraocular muscles. Young Golden Retrievers may be predisposed to this
unusual disease.

necrosis, and phagocytosis. It may also specifically identify antibody localization to the type 2M myofibers.
Electromyography often identifies spontaneous abnormalities and should always be performed to evaluate the
rest of the musculature in cases where a more generalized
myopathy is suspected. CT or MRI is required to diagnose
nerve sheath tumors in cases with unilateral masticatory
muscle atrophy (Figure 14.26).

Management
Masticatory muscle atrophy as a result of systemic disease does not appear to be reversible but does not often
cause significant deficits. Masticatory myositis is treated
with immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids, but
some cases of atrophy are too far advanced for this therapy to be effective. The recommended dose of prednisolone is 1–2 mg/kg PO q12h for 3–4 weeks, after which
the dosage is tapered slowly to achieve the lowest dosage
q48h that eliminates the clinical signs. Most dogs treated
aggressively in the early stages show a good response to
therapy, but relapses are possible. Some cases require the
addition of a further immunosuppressive medication,
such as azathioprine. While cases that respond rapidly
often have a favorable prognosis, chronic loss of muscle
may lead to trismus and permanent dysphagia. Feeding
regimens should be discussed with the owner, as even in
the early stages of a responsive condition feeding tubes

14.26

Diagnosis
Detection of a significant concentration of anti-type
2M muscle fiber antibodies confirms masticatory myositis, although by the time the chronic phase is reached,
the antibody response may well have subsided. Serum
creatine kinase (CK) levels may also be elevated. Muscle
biopsy may reveal an inflammatory infiltrate, myofiber

K22463_C014.indd 578

Figure 14.26 Transverse T1-weighted post-contrast brain MR
image at the level of the brainstem; the hyperintense lesion
compressing the brainstem and seen to exit the skull was
confirmed to be a trigeminal nerve sheath tumor.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

579

14.27

may be necessary, if only to reduce the potential for aspiration pneumonia. Additional therapy such as vigorous
physiotherapy of the jaw muscles (by encouraging the dog
to chew rawhides or play with tennis balls) is advisable.

FACIAL PARALYSIS
Definition/overview
Dogs and less commonly cats can present with a drooping
of the face due to reduced innervation of the muscles of
facial expression. This is most commonly seen as a drooping lip but can also affect the eyelids (Figure 14.27).

Etiology
Facial nerve dysfunction may be due to disease of the
peripheral facial nerve caused by OMI, trauma, hypothyroidism, neoplasia of the middle/inner ear, or polyneuropathies. Disease of the facial nerve nucleus in the medulla
of the brainstem can result from any disease affecting the
CNS. The most common cause of peripheral facial nerve
paralysis has been reported to be idiopathic (75% of dogs
and 25% of cats with facial paralysis). In addition, facial
nerve palsy is sometimes observed in animals with more
generalized peripheral neuropathies (e.g. those affecting
multiple limbs).

Pathophysiology
Muscles that control facial expression and maintain
the normal appearance of the palpebral fissures and
mouth are innervated by the facial nerve. The neuron
cell bodies are located in the facial nuclei of the rostral
medulla and axons leave the ventrolateral surface of
the medulla ventral to CN VIII (vestibulocochlear nerve).
CN VII (facial nerve) enters the petrosal bone through
the internal acoustic meatus on the dorsal aspect of CN
VIII and emerges from the skull through the stylomastoid foramen. Any disease affecting CN VII along its path
can result in facial paresis, which is often seen as an
acute-onset disease.

Clinical presentation
Facial nerve paralysis or palsy may be unilateral or bilateral. Widening of the palpebral fissure and laxity of the
facial muscles of expression may be seen. The lip may
droop on the affected side and food or saliva may fall
from that side of the mouth. The nasal philtrum can be
deviated to the normal side in the early stages and drooping of the ears may be apparent in some breeds. There
are some signs of CN VII dysfunction, for which pet owners may seek veterinary attention, that do not immediately suggest a facial nerve lesion. Owners may observe
the third eyelid flicking over the eye. In these cases, the

K22463_C014.indd 579

Figure 14.27 A 6-year-old female Boxer with left-sided facial
paresis.

animal substitutes globe retraction (with concomitant
third eyelid protrusion) for blinking with the paralyzed
lids. Additionally, accumulation of food in cheeks that
have poor muscle tone may lead to halitosis.
Loss of the palpebral and corneal reflexes predisposes
the animal to exposure keratitis, which can occur subsequent to improper lubrication of the cornea, despite normal tear production. Clinical signs are usually maximal
within 7 days and recovery can take 3–6 weeks if it occurs
at all. With chronicity, muscle contracture can lead to narrowing of the palpebral fissure, widening of the mouth
and, in unilateral cases, deviation of the nostrils towards
the affected side.

Diagnosis
All possible causes of facial paresis and/or paralysis
should be excluded before this specific diagnosis of idiopathic facial paresis can be made. A thorough investigation for ear disease should be undertaken in addition to
blood tests for hypothyroidism and electromyography
to rule out polyneuropathies. MRI may reveal contrast
enhancement of the intratemporal facial nerve, which
may suggest a poorer prognosis.

Management
There is no effective treatment for the underlying disease but it is important to ensure that the cornea is adequately lubricated (either by endogenous production
or eye drops). The prognosis for idiopathic facial palsy

23/04/16 1:20 pm

580

Diseases of specific organ systems

varies; many animals make a gradual recovery (weeks to
months) but some are left with permanent deficits. These
deficits may progress to muscle contracture and deform
the facial expression permanently. This can be mistakenly interpreted as hemifacial spasm, an uncommon syndrome in dogs and cats.

SPINAL DISORDERS
Clinical signs of spinal cord dysfunction
The clinical signs associated with spinal cord dysfunction
depend on the location, size, and rate of development of
the lesion. A small lesion on one side of the spinal cord
without a great deal of associated cord swelling (e.g. a
slowly growing tumor) will likely cause signs predominantly on the side of the lesion. However, a large lesion or
a lesion associated with substantial cord swelling (e.g. an
acute disk herniation in the thoracolumbar region) will
likely result in bilateral signs of dysfunction. In most spinal cord disorders, bilateral deficits will be observed, but
the deficits are often more pronounced on the side of the
lesion. Proprioceptive and nociceptive information traveling toward the brain, as well as voluntary motor impulses
traveling from the brain, can be affected with spinal cord
disease. With progressive spinal cord disease, proprioception is usually the first deficit observed, followed by deficits in voluntary motor ability and finally deficits in the
ability to perceive painful stimuli (nociception).
The clinical signs listed below for each of the anatomic
subdivisions of the spinal cord represent all of the possible abnormalities that may be encountered with lesions
in these respective areas. The clinician may, for example,
encounter cases of cervical myelopathy in which severe
neck pain is the only clinically detectable abnormality. Alternatively, cases may be encountered with more
extensive lesions in the same anatomic location in which
the patient is tetraplegic with minimal pain perception
to the limbs and having respiratory difficulty. There is a
spectrum of possible clinical presentations between these
two extreme examples. A topic that is sometimes confusing to clinicians is that of upper motor neuron (UMN)
fecal incontinence. Although it is apparently less common than with cauda equina lesions, fecal incontinence
may result from cervical or thoracolumbar spinal cord
lesions (particularly dorsal lesions, commonly of a cystic nature). This may be due to interruption of ascending
information from the rectum to brainstem and cerebral
centers responsible for a normal, coordinated defecation
reflex, interruption of descending inhibitory influence
from such centers on the local spinal cord sacral defecation reflex, or a combination of the two. Since fecal

K22463_C014.indd 580

incontinence in these cases does not directly involve the
LMNs innervating the anal sphincter musculature or the
sensory neurons or nerves innervating the perineum,
perineal sensation (in patients with intact pain sensation), as well as anal sphincter tone and perineal reflexes
(e.g. anal reflex), are typically normal. The clinical information regarding UMN fecal incontinence in veterinary
patients is limited, but it suggests that it may be more
responsive to surgical intervention than LMN fecal incontinence. The cauda equina is defined as the nerve roots
derived from the cord segments L7 and caudally. Damage
to the spinal cord segments supplying the cauda equina
will produce the same clinical signs of dysfunction as disruption of the respective nerve roots.

Clinical signs related to disease of C1–C5 spinal
cord segments
●● Cervical pain (hyperesthesia).
●● Proprioceptive deficits ipsilateral to the lesion (forelimb and hindlimb) or all four limbs.

●● Voluntary motor deficits ipsilateral to the lesion

●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

(forelimb and hindlimb) or all four limbs, varying
from paresis to plegia. The paresis or plegia (hemiparesis, hemiplegia, tetraparesis, tetraplegia) is UMN
in nature, with normal to hyperactive reflex activity
in all limbs.
Horner’s syndrome ipsilateral to the lesion or
bilaterally.
Respiratory difficulty (severe lesions) involving both
chest excursions and diaphragmatic movements.
UMN bladder dysfunction.
UMN fecal incontinence is possible.
Nociceptive (pain perception) deficits are possible in
all four limbs.

Clinical signs related to disease of C6–T2 spinal
cord segments
●● Cervical pain (hyperesthesia).
●● Proprioceptive deficits ipsilateral to the lesion (forelimb and hindlimb) or all four limbs.
●● Voluntary motor deficits ipsilateral to the lesion
(forelimb and hindlimb) or all four limbs, varying
from paresis to plegia. The paresis or plegia is classically LMN in nature in the forelimbs (involvement of
the gray matter of C6–T2 or the efferent axonal processes from that gray matter) and UMN in nature in
the hindlimbs. In some instances (e.g. caudal cervical
spondylomyelopathy), caudal cervical lesions may
result in obvious signs of UMN paraparesis, with subtle or clinically inapparent forelimb deficits.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

●● Horner’s syndrome ipsilateral to the lesion or
bilaterally.

581

●● UMN fecal incontinence is possible.
●● Nociceptive deficits are possible in both hindlimbs.

●● Decreased or absent cutaneous trunci (panniculus)

●●

●●
●●
●●

reflex ipsilateral to the lesion or bilaterally. The deficit is due to impairment of the efferent arm of the
reflex arc.
Respiratory difficulty with severe lesions. The
­respiratory pattern often differs from that seen with
­C1–C5 spinal cord lesions. Since the phrenic nerve
arises from spinal cord segments C5–C7, there is
usually enough phrenic nerve function to provide
diaphragmatic movement, but impulses from the
medullary respiratory centers cannot effectively traverse the damaged cord segments to stimulate the
cell bodies of the intercostal nerves. This is the reason for the ‘abdominal breathing’ pattern seen with
severe caudal cervical myelopathies. The thoracic
cage moves minimally, if at all, and the exaggerated
activity of the diaphragm causes the abdominal contents to move passively.
UMN bladder dysfunction.
UMN fecal incontinence is possible.
Nociceptive deficits are possible in all four limbs.

Clinical signs related to disease of T3–L3 spinal
cord segments
●● Thoracolumbar pain (hyperesthesia).
●● Proprioceptive deficits in the hindlimb ipsilateral to
the lesion or both hindlimbs.

●● Voluntary motor deficits in the hindlimb ipsilateral

●●

●●

●●

●●

to the lesion or both hindlimbs. The paresis or plegia
(monoparesis, monoplegia, paraparesis, paraplegia)
is UMN in nature, with normal to hyperactive reflex
activity in the hindlimbs.
The forelimbs are neurologically normal (normal
proprioception, normal voluntary motor activity).
Schiff–Sherrington posture may be seen in the forelimbs and should not be confused with a cervical spinal cord problem. Schiff–Sherrington posture is an
anatomic phenomenon, not a prognostic indicator.
Depending on the nature of the injury, spinal shock
is also a possibility.
Horner’s syndrome is possible with very cranial
lesions (T3 spinal cord level), but less likely in comparison with cervical lesions.
Decreased or absent cutaneous trunci (panniculus)
reflex, approximately one to four vertebral levels
caudal to the spinal cord lesion. The deficit is due to
impairment of the afferent arm of the reflex arc.
UMN bladder dysfunction.

K22463_C014.indd 581

Clinical signs related to disease of L4–S3 spinal
cord segments
●● Lumbar pain (hyperesthesia).
●● Proprioceptive deficits in the hindimb ipsilateral to
●●

●●

●●
●●
●●

the lesion or in both hindlimbs.
Voluntary motor deficits in the hindlimb ipsilateral
to the lesion or both hindlimbs. The paresis or plegia
(monoparesis, monoplegia, paraparesis, paraplegia)
is LMN in nature, with a decreased to absent patellar reflex ipsilateral to the lesion or bilaterally. The
withdrawal and gastrocnemius reflexes may be normal or decreased, depending on the extent of damage
to the L6 spinal segment (L6 contributes to the sciatic
nerve).
A decreased or absent panniculus (cutaneous trunci)
reflex may or may not be appreciable one to four
vertebral levels caudal to the lesion, because the last
three or four lumbar spinal nerves do not give off
dorsal cutaneous branches.
LMN bladder dysfunction.
LMN fecal incontinence is possible. Decreased anal
tone is possible.
Nociceptive deficits are possible in both hindlimbs
and the tail.

Neurodiagnostic investigation
History and findings of physical and neurologic examinations will identify a neurologic problem and assist with
neuroanatomic localization and consideration of differentials. The onset (acute or chronic), rate of progression
(rapid or gradual), and temporal relation (intermittent
and/or episodic, stable or insidious) can be established.
A recommended diagnostic approach to spinal cord diseases is as follows:

●● CBC, serum biochemistry profile, and urinalysis.
●● Thoracic radiographs in animals >5 years of age and
after trauma.

●● Survey spinal radiographs can assist with recognition of obvious abnormalities such as diskospondylitis, luxations, and bone neoplasia. If an abnormality
is not seen, advanced imaging and CSF analysis are
indicated.
●● CSF collection, preferably from the cerebellomedullary cistern and caudal lumbar region
(Figures 14.28a, b).

23/04/16 1:20 pm

582

Diseases of specific organ systems

14.28

14.29

Figure 14.29 A lateral cervicothoracic myelogram.

●● CT is used as a primary method to evaluate the
spine or assist with determining lesion extent after
myelography.
●● MRI is becoming more available to veterinarians in
general and specialty practice and is considered the
standard of care in the detection of lesions within the
spinal cord.

a

Additional diagnostic procedures include electrodiagnostic evaluation (electromyography and nerve conduction
studies), nerve and muscle biopsy, CSF protein electrophoresis, serology, PCR, and exploratory surgery.

VASCULAR DISEASE
fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy
Definition/overview
Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy (FCEM) is characterized by acute spinal cord infarction caused by embolism of fibrocartilage identical to that of the nucleus
pulposus of the intervertebral disk. Acute tetra-, para-,
or monoparesis or monoplegia can be seen based on the
location of the ischemic injury to the cord. Most commonly
this affects large breed dogs. FCEM rarely affects cats.

Etiology
FCEM is caused by embolism of fibrocartilage identical to that of the nucleus pulposus of the intervertebral
disk (IVD).

b
Figures 14.28a, b (a) The skin over the caudal skull and cranial
cervical column is shaved and prepared in a sterile fashion for
a CSF tap at the cerebellomedullary cistern. (b) A spinal needle
with a translucent hub is used to obtain CSF and it is allowed to
drip into a sterile polypropylene tube.

●● Myelography and epidurography are useful for the
detection and characterization of compressive spinal
cord lesions (extradural, intradural, and intramedullary) and for determining the extent of the compression (Figure 14.29).

K22463_C014.indd 582

Pathophysiology
Many theories exist as to the pathophysiology for embolization. Entry of disk material into the vascular system
and embolization from the point of entry to the arteries and veins of the spinal cord has yet to be elucidated.
The gray matter is more severely affected because of
its higher metabolic demand. Nonchondrodystrophoid
breeds are predisposed, which may relate to the disk
being more gelatinous and prone to cause microextrusion. FCEM is frequently recognized in large and giant

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

breed dogs but also affects small- to medium-sized dogs.
Purebred dogs that have been documented with FCEM
include Miniature Schnauzers, German Shepherd Dogs,
and Irish Wolfhounds. FCEM is rare in cats. In dogs the
male-to-female ratio varies in different studies and the
median age in most studies is 5 or 6 years with a wide age
range. In cats, males and females are equally represented
with most cats older than 7 years.

583

with the extent of longitudinal and transverse lesions on
MRI. Diagnosis of FCEM is confirmed by histopathology
and documentation of nucleus pulposus in the spinal
cord vasculature.

Management

Neuroanatomic localization often is associated with the
spinal cord intumescences, but other spinal cord regions
can be involved. Thoracolumbar signs are more common
than cervicothoracic signs. Clinical signs usually are
associated with trauma or exercise. Asymmetrical lesion
distribution is a clinical feature due to the distribution
of the blood vessels to the spinal cord parenchyma; however, the lesion can be symmetrical. Symmetrical lesions
more often are associated with loss of nociception. Spinal
hyperesthesia can be present initially but is absent after
the onset of ischemia. Maximal neurologic deficits usually occur within the first 24 hours. Dogs with lumbosacral intumescent involvement more often have loss of
deep pain perception.

Treatment is with supportive care. As for all spinal cord
injuries, physical rehabilitation is important in the process of recovery.
Depending on inclusion criteria, recovery rates have
ranged from 54% to 84%. Partial or complete recovery is
dependent on the extent of spinal cord damage. Negative
indicators of prognosis have been correlated with involvement of the intumescences, symmetry of signs, severe
neurologic dysfunction, lack of improvement within
14 days, and decreased deep pain sensation. Outcome also
has been associated with the longitudinal and transverse
extent of the ischemic intramedullary lesion on MRI.
However, no associations have been identified between
recovery times and clinical or MRI variables. Dog size and
severity of clinical signs contribute to owners electing
for euthanasia. Animals with functional recovery within
2 weeks have a better prognosis; however, recovery may
not be complete.

Diagnosis

aortic thrombosis

Clinical presentation

Diagnosis is based on history, signalment, and clinical
signs. Intramedullary spinal cord swelling provides early
myelographic evidence of FCEM. MRI is the preferred
diagnostic imaging modality for detection of intramedullary lesions and a presumptive diagnosis of FCEM. MRI
findings include a focal, sharply demarcated, and often
asymmetric intramedullary lesion, which predominantly
affects the gray matter (Figure 14.30). CSF analysis may
reveal abnormalities in severe cases. Dogs that are ambulatory on presentation are more likely to have normal
MRI. The severity of neurologic signs has been associated
14.30

Figure 14.30 Sagittal T2-weighted cervical spinal MR image
of a 6-year-old Labrador Retriever with a hyperintense lesion
within the parenchyma of the spinal cord (arrow), confirmed
histopathologically to be associated with a fibrocartilaginous
embolus.

K22463_C014.indd 583

Definition/overview
Aortic thromboembolism, also known as saddle thrombus, often causes acute neurologic dysfunction affecting the hindlimbs in addition to clinical signs of poor
peripheral perfusion, such as nail bed cyanosis. Cats
with systemic thromboembolic disease have a thrombus that obstructs the terminal aorta. The disease can
occasionally affect dogs and may present more chronically as lameness or exercise intolerance affecting the
hindlimbs.

Etiology
Cats with systemic thromboembolic disease have a thrombus that obstructs the terminal aorta. The most frequent
underlying disease in cats with thromboembolism is
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, but also other unclassified
cardiomyopathies. In dogs, the disease is more commonly
associated with steroid use, hyperadrenocorticism, and
neoplasia.

Pathophysiology
Aortic thromboembolism is also known as saddle thrombus. Thrombi form in the left atrium and dilation of
the left atrium is one of the greatest risk factors for

23/04/16 1:20 pm

584

Diseases of specific organ systems

14.31

aortic thromboembolism. The three conditions that favor
thrombus formation include blood stasis, hypercoagulability, and endothelial damage (Virchow’s triad). Once the
thrombus forms, it usually follows a path of least resistance and eventually lodges at the aortic trifurcation.
Restriction of blood flow by the embolus and release of
vasoactive substances cause ischemic injury to the nerves
and muscles of the hindlimbs.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs consist of acute onset of an asymmetrical
hindlimb paresis and/or paralysis. Abyssinian, Birman,
Ragdoll, and male cats were overrepresented in one
study. The femoral pulse is weak or absent. The limbs are
cold and the nail beds are cyanotic and fail to bleed when
cut. The hindlimbs are stiff and the muscles are hard and
painful on palpation. Typically, there is loss of hindlimb
nociception distally. Tachypnea and hypothermia are frequently seen. Congestive heart failure and arrhythmias
can each be seen in over 40% of cats.

Diagnosis

Figure 14.31 3-D reconstructed CT scan of the pelvis and
hindlimbs identifying a lack of vascular perfusion in the left
femoral artery (arrow) secondary to an intravascular thrombus.
(Courtesy Davies Veterinary Specialists)

Aortic thromboembolism is suspected based on clinical
signs. Common biochemical abnormalities in these cats
include hyperglycemia, hyperkalemia, azotemia, and
a markedly elevated CK concentration soon after the
embolic episode. Evidence of cardiac disease is further
supported by physical examination findings, thoracic
radiographs, and echocardiography. Doppler ultrasonography and/or CT of the aorta and its trifurcation can
sometimes identify thrombotic disease (Figure 14.31).

improve if cats live to discharge. Studies have shown
rates of survival to discharge to range between 27% and
35% using various treatments. Median survival times
of cats surviving after discharge range from 117 to 345
days. Cats with congestive heart failure tend to have a
significantly shorter survival time than cats without
this problem.

Management

TRAUMATIC DISEASES

Initially, therapy involves management of the cardiac
disease and supportive care. Cats benefit from administration of appropriate fluid therapy, acepromazine
maleate (ACP), thromboembolism treatment, and pain
management. Use of ACP is controversial; although it
may improve collateral blood flow and decrease anxiety, it may cause hypotension and current advice is to
avoid its use. Specific therapies for the clot include surgical removal, anticoagulants, and thrombolytic agents;
but risks versus benefits need to be considered because
in time the clot may undergo spontaneous thrombolysis. The use of agents to prevent more clot formation is
controversial. Therapies include use of warfarin, heparin, aspirin, and thienopyridine derivatives. Low-dose
aspirin (5 mg/cat q72h) has been shown to produce
similar survival time and recurrence rates to high-dose
aspirin (>25 mg/cat q72h) but with fewer side-effects.
Long-term prognosis for cats with aortic thromoboembolism is guarded in the early recovery phase but may

K22463_C014.indd 584

fractures and luxations
Definition/overview
Spinal fracture and luxation in dogs and cats are most
commonly associated with severe external trauma, occurring in approximately 6% of cases as the cause of spinal
cord dysfunction. The resulting clinical signs can vary
from pain to paralysis with loss of nociception.

Etiology
Automobile-related injury is the most common cause of
exogenous trauma to the spine.

Pathophysiology
The thoracolumbar junction is the most commonly injured
site in dogs and cats. Fractures occur between T11 and L6
in 50–60% of patients after blunt trauma. Fractures in the
thoracic spine may have little displacement because of

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

the protection provided by the ribs, ligamentous ­support,
and epaxial musculature. Fractures and luxations of the
thoracolumbar spine are often associated with other
systemic injuries (e.g. pneumothorax, pulmonary contusions, orthopedic injuries, urogenital injuries, and
diaphragmatic hernia). Approximately 20% of patients
with thoracolumbar fractures have a second spinal column fracture. In the neck, the atlantoaxial junction is
relatively unstable and therefore particularly at risk. The
axis is the most commonly fractured cervical vertebra
because it acts as a fulcrum between the caudal cervical
spine and the so-called cervicocranium (the skull, atlas,
dens, and body of the axis) (Figures 14.32a–c).
Primary mechanical injury to neural tissue can subsequently lead to secondary biochemical injury. The
amount of neural tissue injury is related to the rapidity
and severity of insult and the amount and duration of
compression.

585

Clinical presentation
The neurologic signs are determined by the level of
any associated spinal cord damage. Schiff–Sherrington
posture is a common finding associated with acute thoracolumbar injury but is not a prognostic indicator
(Figure 14.33). Pain perception is carefully assessed in
paraplegic animals to assist with determination of prognosis. Respiratory crises may be noted with acute cervical
spinal cord injury.

Diagnosis
Results of the neurologic examination are used to
determine neuroanatomic localization and severity of
the spinal cord injury. It is important to perform the
neurologic examination with care to prevent further
injury and displacement of the spine. The neurologic
examination findings are most important in establishing the prognosis, irrespective of radiographic

14.32

b

c

a

K22463_C014.indd 585

Figures 14.32a–c (a) Ventrodorsal radiograph of the cranial
cervical spinal column. A fracture of the cranial aspect of
the body of C2 (arrow) can be identified. (b) Sagittal CT scan
of the cranial cervical spinal column of the same dog as in
14.32a showing the linear fracture (arrow). (c) Transverse
reconstruction through the C2 vertebra showing displacement
of the body fracture.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

586

Diseases of specific organ systems

findings. Plain radiography of the entire spine should
be ­performed. Two views are used while minimizing
patient movement by obtaining the ventrodorsal view
using horizontal beam. Results of survey radiography
are used to determine the precise lesion location(s)
and extent, demonstrate multiple lesions, and guide
appropriate management (Figure 14.34). Myelography or
cross-sectional imaging is used when the radiographic
findings do not correlate with the neurologic examination, to evaluate spinal cord swelling in concussive
injuries and to further assess severity of spinal cord
compression. CT or MRI is useful for further evaluating
bone and spinal cord tissues, respectively, and provide
a 3-D configuration of the fracture/luxation extent for
assessment of spinal stability (Figures 14.35a–d).

Management
The critical factor in determining whether conservative
or surgical management of spinal fracture and luxation
is appropriate depends on the presence of instability.
Spinal stability is assessed using a three-compartment
theory (Figure 14.36). Priority is placed on treatment
of extraneural injuries, beginning with management
of shock and hemorrhage. Management of an animal
with spinal trauma focuses on the prevention of secondary injury to the spinal cord parenchyma. Indications
for nonsurgical management include minimal neurologic deficits, minimal vertebral displacement, and lack
of myelographic evidence of spinal cord compression.
Principles of conservative management are appropriate
confinement for 6–8 weeks and use of external coaptation.
The aim of external support is to provide immobilization
of the vertebral segments cranial and caudal to the damaged area. It is important to follow principles of bandage
14.33

care when using methods of external support. The patient
will need to be turned regularly and kept clean and dry to
prevent urine scalding.
Surgical management often provides a better chance
for more rapid and complete neurologic recovery.
However, the role of surgery for spinal trauma remains
unclear. Indications include severe neurologic deficits
and deteriorating neurologic status, imaging evidence
of compression, and damage of two or more vertebral
compartments. Timely surgical intervention is important
to allow for maximal recovery. The objectives for surgical management of spinal trauma are decompression,
realignment, and stabilization. The decompressive procedure should be conservative so as not to disrupt further
the integrity of the vertebrae, but large enough to allow
for removal of compressive material. Successful outcome
after surgical fixation depends on the type and strength
of fixation, the surgeon’s skill and knowledge of the spinal anatomy, and the accuracy of vertebral column alignment (Figure 14.37).
Careful attention to postoperative care is imperative
for the wellbeing of the patient. Potential complications include urinary tract infections, decubital ulcers
(Figures 14.38a, b), and implant failure. Physical rehabilitation is important in the recovery process.
The prognosis for animals with acute spinal injury
is dependent on the results of the neurologic examination. The prognosis for recovery from a spinal fracture or luxation that results in paraplegia with loss of
deep pain perception is considered poor. Patients that
maintain pain perception may still require months to
recover and have residual neurologic deficits including urinary and/or fecal incontinence. Studies of thoracolumbar fracture and luxation have summarized a
70–95% recovery rate for conservative management on
selected cases. Although displacement can vary, results
of spinal stabilization tend to be good if pain perception
remains intact.

14.34

Figure 14.33 A 4-year-old mixed-breed dog exhibits Schiff–
Sherrington posture secondary to an acute thoracolumbar
spinal trauma.

K22463_C014.indd 586

Figure 14.34 Lateral radiograph of a canine thoracic vertebral
column, showing a T12 compressed body fracture (arrow).

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

587

14.35

a

b

d

c

brachial plexus avulsion
Definition/overview
Traumatic injuries causing avulsion of the nerve roots of
the brachial plexus are the most common cause of acute
forelimb monoparesis or monoplegia in small animals.

Etiology
These injuries are usually a result of abduction and simultaneous caudal displacement of the forelimbs caused by
road traffic accidents or falls from a height.

K22463_C014.indd 587

Figures 14.35a–d (a) Transverse T12 and T13 vertebral CT scan
of the fracture depicted in Figure 14.34. Note the subluxation
of the articular processes (arrow). (b) Transverse T12 vertebral
body CT scan showing the fracture depicted in Figure 14.34.
(c) 3-D reconstructed CT scan of the thoracic vertebrae helps
identify the ventral aspect of the T12 body fracture (arrow).
(d) Sagittal T2-weighted MR image of the thoracic vertebrae is
useful to visualize the effect of the T12 fracture (arrow) on the
spinal cord.

Pathophysiology
The site of root avulsion is usually intradural where
the nerve roots arise from the spinal cord. At this point,
nerve roots lack a well-defined perineurium and constitute the weakest structure between the spinal cord and
the peripheral nervous system. If the avulsion is severe
enough, it may place traction over the spinal cord and
damage spinal cord pathways, causing ipsilateral hindlimb neurologic deficits. Both dorsal and ventral nerve
roots can be affected, but the motor roots appear to be
more susceptible to this type of trauma.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

588

Diseases of specific organ systems

14.36

14.38

Figure 14.36 Three-compartment model of vertebral
instability. Compartment one contains the ventral threequarters of the vertebral body and disk and the ventral
longitudinal ligament. The second compartment consists of
the dorsal one-quarter of the vertebral body, the disk, and the
dorsal longitudinal ligament. The third compartment includes
the articular processes, lateral pedicles, dorsal laminae,
interarcuate ligaments, and dorsal spinous processes.

14.37

a
Figure 14.37 Lateral post-spinal fixation radiograph of the dog
with a C2 vertebral fracture illustrated in Figure 14.33.

Clinical presentation
Signs are peracute in onset following the traumatic incident. Depending on which nerve roots are affected, avulsions are divided into three types:

●● Cranial avulsions (C6–C7 nerve roots).
●● Caudal avulsions (C8–T2 nerve roots).
●● Complete avulsions (C6–T2 nerve roots).
Cranial avulsions are rare and result in few clinical signs.
The elbow extensor muscles are not affected, so the animal can bear weight on the affected limb. There is loss
of shoulder movement and elbow flexion, and atrophy
of supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles usually
develops.

K22463_C014.indd 588

b
Figures 14.38a, b (a) An early stage decubital ulcer appearing
over the ischium following a short period of recumbency
in a paralyzed dog. (b) A later stage, open and granulating
decubital ulcer.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

Caudal and complete avulsions are more common
and cause more severe clinical signs. They both cause
paralysis of the triceps brachii muscle, so the animal
cannot extend the elbow or bear weight on the affected
limb. Affected animals drag the limb knuckled over
(Figure 14.39). Forelimb muscles are hypotonic and
severe neurogenic atrophy starts about 1 week after the
injury. Spinal reflexes and postural reactions are reduced.
If the elbow flexor muscles are spared (caudal avulsions),
the animal can carry the limb flexed at this level, avoiding contact with the floor.
Sensory signs are also common. The pattern of
decreased or absent sensation in the affected limb allows
better determination of the type of avulsion. Cutaneous
sensation should be checked in the entire limb, but particular attention should be paid to nociception in the
medial (radial and musculocutaneous) and lateral (radial
and ulnar) digits, since it is essential in determining a
prognosis.
A high percentage of patients with brachial plexus
avulsions show partial Horner’s syndrome and/or loss of
cutaneous trunci reflex ipsilateral to the side of the avulsion. Avulsion of the T1 ventral nerve root causes injury
to the preganglionic sympathetic nerve fibers to the eye,
causing ipsilateral miosis (partial Horner’s syndrome).
Loss of the cutaneous trunci reflex is caused by damage
to the C8–T1 ventral spinal nerve roots that form the lateral thoracic nerve and innervate the cutaneous trunci
muscle. The contralateral reflex is usually present after
ipsilateral stimulation.

Diagnosis
A history of forelimb monoparesis after a traumatic incident should raise a high suspicion of brachial plexus
avulsion. Every animal unable to use one forelimb after
14.39

Figure 14.39 Forelimb monoplegia and moderate proximal
limb muscle atrophy are evident in this dog with a right-sided
brachial plexus avulsion following a traumatic insult.

K22463_C014.indd 589

589

trauma should be examined carefully to detect orthopedic
as well as neurologic abnormalities. MRI of the affected
plexus may provide information on the degree of nerve
and associated soft tissue trauma. Electromyography
allows detection of spontaneous electrical activity in the
denervated muscles 7–10 days after the injury. Nerve
conduction velocity studies of the radial and ulnar
nerves allow determination of the degree of injury.
Since the radial nerve is commonly injured in brachial
plexus avulsions, serial electrodiagnostic evaluations of
this nerve may provide useful diagnostic and prognostic
information.

Management
Unfortunately, there is no routinely effective treatment
for this type of injury. The degree of recovery depends
only on the severity of the nerve lesion at the time of
injury.
If nociception is present in the medial and lateral
digits, prognosis for recovery is good and aggressive
physiotherapy should be recommended to the owner.
If nociception is absent, prognosis will depend on the
severity of the axonal injury, being good for neurapraxic lesions but guarded to poor for axonotmetic (nerve
injury to axon while sparing the myelin) and neurotmetic (disruption of axon, myelin sheaths, and connective tissue) lesions. Pure axonotmesis occurs rarely, so
the potential for recovery, although present, is low and
prognosis poor.
When the proximal branches of the radial and musculocutaneous nerves are spared – so that the elbow flexor
and extensor muscles are not denervated – corrective
surgery can be used to provide carpal extension and prevent the distal part of the limb from collapsing. Tendon
transplantation or carpal arthrodesis procedures can be
performed.
Animals with caudal and complete brachial plexus
avulsions have a poor to guarded prognosis if neurotmesis has occurred. Only those with neurapraxic (temporary
loss of sensory and motor function due to nerve injury)
injuries show improvement and recover completely.
However, most animals do not improve but go on to show
severe limb atrophy, eventually developing serious complications such as trophic ulcers, joint contractures or
self-mutilations from paresthesia, or abnormal sensation in the affected areas produced by regeneration of
sensory nerves. In these cases, amputation of the limb
is necessary. The best predictor of complete recovery
seems to be nociception. Preservation of nociception is an
indicator of a milder type of injury and should prompt
the clinician to recommend supportive therapy while

23/04/16 1:20 pm

590

Diseases of specific organ systems

waiting for motor function to recover. However, if no
improvement is seen during the first 2 months, recovery
is unlikely to occur.

DEGENERATIVE DISEASES
degenerative myelopathy
Definition/overview
Degenerative myelopathy (DM) is a slowly progressive
nonpainful paresis and ataxia usually affecting large
breed dogs (especially the German Shepherd Dog).

duration in the Pembroke Welsh Corgi is 19 months. As
a result of a longer survival time, affected Pembroke
Welsh Corgis often have signs of forelimb paresis at the
time of euthanasia. The earliest clinical signs of DM are
general proprioceptive ataxia and mild paresis in the
hindlimbs. Worn nails and asymmetric hindlimb weakness are apparent on physical examination. Asymmetry
of signs at disease onset is frequently reported. At disease onset, spinal reflex abnormalities are consistent
with UMN paresis localized in the T3–L3 spinal cord segments. Patellar reflexes may be normal or exaggerated;
14.40

Etiology
For many years the etiology of DM remained unknown.
A mutation in the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene is
now associated with this disease.

Pathophysiology
The uniformity of clinical signs, histopathology, age,
and breed predilections suggested an inherited basis
for DM. Segregation of DM in families has been reported
in the Siberian Husky, Pembroke Welsh Corgi, and
Chesapeake Bay Retriever. Dogs testing homozygous
for the mutation are at risk for developing DM. Some
dogs are h
­ omozygous for the mutation but remain free
of clinical signs, which suggests a
­ ge-related incomplete
penetrance. A progressive degeneration of the spinal
cord, predominantly in the T3–L3 region, is responsible
for the clinical signs.

a

Clinical presentation
Dogs with DM show an insidious, progressive ataxia and
paresis of the hindlimbs ultimately leading to paraplegia
and euthanasia. If hindlimb hyporeflexia is observed,
reflecting nerve root involvement, the disease is sometimes termed canine degenerative radiculomyelopathy.
Although the German Shepherd Dog is the most commonly affected breed, DM has been reported in many
other pure and mixed breeds. There is no sex predilection.
In most breeds, the mean age of onset of neurologic signs
is 9 years.
Progressive, asymmetric UMN paraparesis, hindlimb
ataxia, and lack of paraspinal hyperesthesia are key
clinical features of DM. The clinical course of DM can
vary after the presumptive diagnosis. Pet owners usually elect euthanasia when dogs can no longer support
weight in their hindlimbs and need walking assistance
(Figures 14.40a, b). Smaller breed dogs can be cared for
by the pet owner over a longer time. The median disease

K22463_C014.indd 590

b
Figures 14.40a, b (a) A 9-year-old German Shepherd Dog with
degenerative myelopathy demonstrates profound weakness of
the hindlimbs. (b) Severe motor dysfunction of the hindlimbs
can be assisted with the use of canine support carts, as shown
in this photo.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

591

however, hyporeflexia of the patellar reflex has also
been described in dogs at a similar disease stage. Flexor
reflexes may also be normal or show crossed extension
(suggestive of chronic UMN dysfunction). Most large
breed dogs progress to nonambulatory paraparesis
within 6–9 months from onset of clinical signs and are
euthanized during this disease stage. If the dog is not
euthanized early, clinical signs will progress to LMN
paraplegia and ascend to affect the forelimbs. Flaccid
tetraplegia ultimately occurs in dogs with advanced
disease. The paresis becomes more symmetrical as the
disease progresses. LMN signs emerge as hyporeflexia of
the patellar and withdrawal reflexes, flaccid paralysis,
and widespread muscle atrophy beginning in the hindlimbs as the dogs become n
­ onambulatory. Widespread
and severe loss of muscle mass occurs in the appendicular muscles in the late stage of DM.

alpha-tocopherol did not affect neurologic progression
in a study of DM affected dogs. Physical rehabilitation
regimens have been advocated for management of DM.
Overall, long-term prognosis is considered poor.

Diagnosis

Herniation of the nucleus pulposus through the annulus
of the disk and extrusion of nuclear material into the spinal canal, resulting in concussion of the spinal cord and
concurrent compression.

Tentative antemortem diagnosis is presently based on
ruling out other diseases causing progressive myelopathy. Common differentials include intervertebral disk
disease (IVDD), inflammatory disease, and spinal cord
neoplasia. Hip dysplasia and degenerative lumbosacral
stenosis often can be confused with the diagnosis of
DM, although the neurologic findings are different if a
careful examination is performed. It is not uncommon
for DM affected dogs to have coexisting neurological and
orthopedic diseases. Diagnostic testing is typically performed in the early disease stage. The lack of abnormal
findings of electrodiagnostic testing and myelography
or cross-sectional imaging (MRI, CT), along with characteristic disease pattern for progression of neurologic
signs, support a presumptive diagnosis of DM. Definitive
diagnosis of DM is determined postmortem by histopathologic examination of the spinal cord. A blood test is
available to identify SOD1 mutations but the results can
only suggest the disease or help rule it out rather than
confirm it.

Management
Treatment regimens have been empiric, with lack of
evidence-based medicine approaches. Moreover, there
exists no prophylactic or curative treatment for human
DM. Aminocaproic acid, an antiprotease agent, has
been advocated for long-term management of DM;
however, there have been no published clinical data
to support drug efficacy. While treatment of vitamin
deficiencies can resolve neurologic disease in some animals, therapy with parenteral cyanocobalamin or oral

K22463_C014.indd 591

hansen type i intervertebral disk disease
(See also Chapter 15: Musculoskeletal disorders)

Definition/overview
Herniation of degenerate nucleus pulposus can result in
sudden onset of clinical signs ranging from spinal pain
to the loss of motor function and pain sensation. This is
most common in the thoracolumbar spinal column but
can affect the cervical spinal cord as well.

Etiology

Pathophysiology
Hansen type I IVDD is herniation of the nucleus pulposus through the annular fibers and extrusion of nuclear
material into the spinal canal. The condition is typically
associated with chondroid disk degeneration. The disk
extrudes through the dorsal annulus, causing ventral,
ventrolateral, or circumferential compression of the spinal cord. Acute disk extrusion is characterized by the
presence of soft disk material within the vertebral canal
and extradural hemorrhage. Chronic disk extrusion is
characterized by extradural fibrous adhesions around
the herniated disk material, which has often become
a hard mineralized mass. Hansen type I IVDD typically
affects chondrodystrophic breeds and has an acute onset.
However, large nonchondrodystrophic breeds of dog such
as the Dobermann and Labrador Retriever may also be
affected. The Dachshund has the highest incidence followed in succession by the Pekingese, Welsh Corgi, Beagle,
Lhasa Apso, and Miniature Poodle. In Dachshunds, severe
disk degeneration denoted by presence of mineralization
on spinal radiography is highly heritable. Hansen type I
IVDD most commonly occurs within the thoracolumbar
region of chondrodystrophic breeds. The thoracolumbar
junction (T12–T13 to L1–L2) accounts for the highest incidence of all disk lesions. The incidence of thoracolumbar
IVDD progressively decreases from T12–T13 caudally.
The most common site for Hansen type I IVDD in large,

23/04/16 1:20 pm

592

Diseases of specific organ systems

nonchondrodystrophic breeds is the interspace between
L1 and L2.

signifying suspected IVD extrusion include the following
(Figure 14.43):

Clinical presentation

●●
●●
●●
●●

Onset of neurologic signs may be peracute (<1 hour),
acute (<24 hours), or gradual (>24 hours). Dogs presented
with peracute or acute thoracolumbar disk extrusions
may manifest clinical signs of spinal shock or Schiff–
Sherrington postures. These indicate acute and severe
spinal cord injury but do not determine prognosis. The
degree of neurologic dysfunction is variable and affects
prognosis. Clinical signs vary from spinal hyperesthesia
only to paraplegia with or without nociception. Dogs with
pain only are usually reluctant to walk and may show
kyphosis (Figure 14.41); these dogs often have myelographic, CT, and MRI evidence of substantial spinal cord
compression. Dogs with paraplegia and lack of nociception usually have undergone acute and severe disk extrusions (Figure 14.42).

Diagnosis
The initial diagnosis of IVDD is obtained from the
signalment, history, and neurologic examination.
Differential diagnoses to be considered include trauma,
fibrocartilaginous embolism, diskospondylitis, neoplasia, and (meningo)myelitis. Diagnosis of thoracolumbar disk extrusion and/or protrusion is confirmed by
­cross-sectional imaging and surgery.
Survey spinal radiography can help to determine the
diagnosis and site of a thoracolumbar disk extrusion
if radiographic signs are well defined and consistent
with neuroanatomic localization. Radiographic findings

Narrowing of the IVD space.
Wedging of the disk space.
Narrowing of the intervertebral foramen.
Mineralized material in the spinal canal or superimposed over the intervertebral foramen.

As survey radiographs identify the correct site of disk
extrusion in only about 70% of cases, further imaging,
such as myelography or cross-sectional imaging (CT, MRI),
is strongly recommended prior to surgery.
CT or MRI is used alone or as an adjunct to myelography to more completely delineate lateralization of
extruded disk material and lesion extent. CT alone has
been shown to be more accurate than myelography at
identifying the major site of disk herniation and has
the advantage of being a more rapid test with fewer
­side-effects than myelography. Mineralized disk material
and acute hemorrhage can be identified in the vertebral
canal using noncontrast-enhanced CT (Figure 14.44).
Acutely extruded disk material typically is recognized as
14.42

14.41
Figure 14.42 Typical posture adopted by dogs with paraplegia.

14.43

Figure 14.41 An arched back (kyphosis) is often indicative of
thoracolumbar pain.

K22463_C014.indd 592

Figure 14.43 The radiographic characteristics of intervertebral
disk disease are highlighted in this radiograph at L6/L7 (arrow).

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

a heterogeneous hyperattenuating extradural mass. The
attenuation of the disk material increases with the degree
of mineralization. Chronically extruded disk material has
a more homogeneous hyperattenuating appearance.
MRI provides a more sensitive technique in recognition of spinal cord pathology (e.g. edema and
hemorrhage) and 3-D delineation of the spinal cord
compression, allowing for an accurate surgical approach
and determining the extent of surgical decompression required. MRI is considered the best method for
early recognition of in-situ disk degeneration and for
determining localization and extent of extruded disk
material within the epidural space (Figure 14.45). MRI
may have diagnostic value in detecting myelomalacia.
Findings from a recent study in dogs with IVD extrusion
and lack of nociception suggested that an area of hyperintensity >6 times the length of L2 on T2-weighted sagittal images may allow for a presumptive diagnosis of
myelomalacia.

Management
Indications for nonsurgical treatment of thoracolumbar
IVDD include a first-time incident of spinal pain only, mild
to moderate paraparesis, and the financial constraints
of the client. The last is the only reason for nonsurgical

14.44

593

treatment of a recumbent patient, which should always
be considered a surgical candidate, if possible. Dogs can
be managed with strict cage rest for 4–6 weeks combined
with pain relief using anti-inflammatory drugs, opioids,
and muscle relaxants. GI protectants also may be necessary with use of anti-inflammatory therapies. Never use
NSAIDs in combination with corticosteroids, as gastric
ulcers can result and in some cases these may lead to the
death of the animal. Acupuncture also has been advocated as a treatment for pain management. Dogs should
be monitored closely for deterioration of neurologic status. If pain persists or the neurologic status worsens, surgical management is recommended. Studies have shown
that recovery rates in nonambulatory dogs are lower and
recurrence rates higher following conservative rather
than surgical treatment. Success rates for conservative
management of ambulatory dogs with pain only or mild
paresis range from 82% to 100%. More recent retrospective studies of conservatively managed dogs with thoracolumbar disk disease documented 30–50% recurrence
rates in dogs with minimally affected ambulatory status.
Recurrence of spinal pain in dogs with thoracolumbar
IVDD that are conservatively managed usually occurs
within 6 months to 1 year from onset of the initial clinical signs. Methylprednisolone sodium succinate is not
recommended for the treatment of this disease due to the
lack of demonstrated efficacy and the side-effects.
Indications for surgical management of thoracolumbar IVDD include spinal pain or paresis unresponsive
to medical therapy, recurrence or progression of clinical signs, nonambulatory paraparesis or paraplegia
with intact nociception, and paraplegia without nociception for <24–48 hours. Prolonged loss of nociception
(>48 hours) carries a poor prognosis and owners should
be made aware of this prior to surgery. However, it is often
difficult to know when nociception was lost; in addition,
recovery has been observed in dogs that had surgery
>5 days after the onset of paraplegia. Surgery includes
14.45

Figure 14.44 Transverse CT scan of the lumbar spinal column
at the site of an acute mineralized intervertebral disk extrusion
(arrow).

K22463_C014.indd 593

Figure 14.45 Sagittal T2-weighted MR image of the lumbar
spine of the dog in Figure 14.43. An acute mineralized disk
extrusion (arrow) is seen to compress neural tissue at L6/7.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

594

Diseases of specific organ systems

spinal cord decompression by removal of extruded disk
material. Chronicity of disk extrusion at the time of surgery may influence the ease with which extruded disk
material can be removed.

hansen type ii intervertebral disk disease
Definition/overview
Herniation of the annulus fibrosus can result in slow progressive clinical signs ranging from intermittent spinal
pain, through ataxia and paresis to the loss of motor function in the later stages. This is most common in the thoracolumbar spinal column but can affect the cervical and
lumbosacral spinal cord as well, where it can be accompanied by degenerative changes of the vertebrae creating
a more dynamic/position-associated disease. (See cervical spondylomyelopathy and degenerative lumbosacral
syndrome.)

Etiology
Herniation of the annulus of the disk (protrusion) into
the spinal canal resulting in spinal cord compression.

Pathophysiology
Hansen type II IVDD is annular protrusion caused by
shifting of central nuclear material and is commonly
associated with fibroid disk degeneration. The annulus
fibrosus slowly protrudes into the spinal canal to cause
spinal cord compression. The chronic compression can
lead to focal ischemia and other microvascular derangements of the spinal cord. Type II IVDD usually occurs at
the mobile points of the spinal column and is more common in older, nonchondrodystrophic breeds of dog. It is
not uncommon to identify multiple affected disk spaces.
Chronic spinal instability may be an underlying predisposition to type II IVDD.

Clinical presentation
The clinical signs of Hansen type II IVDD include slowly
progressive hindlimb ataxia, weakness, reluctance to
rise or jump on furniture, and difficulty climbing stairs.
Onset of clinical signs is considered chronic and progressive, although acute exacerbations of signs are not
uncommon. Localization is focal with asymmetrical or
symmetrical weakness. Paraspinal hyperesthesia may or
may not be present.

CT myelography, or MRI is necessary to locate the spinal
cord compression (Figure 14.46).

Management
Medical therapy is indicated in animals with early
onset type II IVDD and mild deficits. It also is indicated
in those animals that are concurrently afflicted with
suspected DM. Medical therapy involves administration
of NSAIDs or corticosteroids. The use of a muscle relaxant such as diazepam or methocarbamol should be considered in patients with spinal hyperesthesia. Clinical
signs do not always respond to medical therapy and
often return after discontinuation of these therapies.
Surgical decompression may offer a better long-term
outcome.
The type of surgical decompression depends on the
location of the lesion. A hemilaminectomy is performed
for lesions in the thoracic spine and lumbar spine cranial to L5 (Figures 14.47a, b). A dorsal laminectomy
is performed if the lesion is located in the lumbosacral
area (Figure 14.48). Typically, type II disk protrusions
require more spinal cord manipulation to relieve the
compression from the annulus. The protrusion is usually
excised; however, decompression by laminectomy alone
may also be adequate in cases where the disk material
is irretrievable. Lateral corpectomy is an alternative
method for ­decompression of ventral and lateroventral
­thoracolumbar disk disease. Often the neurologic status
of the animal is worse after surgery but this is usually
temporary. Often dogs with chronic clinical signs have
multiple IVDD ­
herniations, which complicate surgical
decision making.
If surgery is instituted early, prognosis is usually fair
to good when patients are considered refractory to medical therapy. If the disease has coursed for several months
and is associated with severe neurologic signs (i.e. paraplegia), the prognosis is considered guarded.

14.46

Diagnosis
Diagnosis may be suspected on routine spinal radiographs that show the presence of degenerative changes
in the spinal column, such as spondylosis. Myelography,

K22463_C014.indd 594

Figure 14.46 Sagittal T2-weighted MR image of the
thoracolumbar spinal column in a dog with multiple type II
intervertebral disk herniations.

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

14.47

595

14.48

a

b
Figures 14.47a, b (a) The surgical ‘window’ for a
hemilaminectomy is illustrated on a spinal column model.
(b) The spinal cord is visible through the hemilaminectomy
window made in the vertebrae.

cervical spondylomyelopathy
(wobbler syndrome)
Definition/overview
Cervical spondylomyelopathy describes a syndrome
of compression of the cervical spinal cord as a result
of degenerative and congenital changes in the cervical spine. There are many names for this syndrome
including wobbler syndrome, caudal cervical stenotic
myelopathy, cervical malformation/malarticulation, and
disk-associated wobbler syndrome (DAWS). Classically,
this is thought of as a disease of large (e.g. Dobermann,
Dalmatian) and giant breed (e.g. Great Dane, Mastiff
breeds, Bernese Mountain Dog) dogs, although identical
changes also occur in toy and small breed dogs such as
Chihuahuas and Yorkshire Terriers.

K22463_C014.indd 595

Figure 14.48 The surgical ‘window’ for a dorsal laminectomy is
illustrated in this lumbar vertebral radiograph.

Etiology
The etiology of these changes is most likely m
­ ultifactorial.
Genetic factors probably play a role as the disease is seen
in specific breeds of dog, although a pattern of inheritance
has not been established in commonly affected breeds.
Overnutrition and excess calcium supplementation in the
first year of life has been implicated in Great Danes, but
correction of these feeding patterns has not prevented
occurrence of the disease in this breed. It has also been
postulated that conformation of the head and neck influences the development of lesions. However, a study on
Dobermanns failed to find a correlation between various

23/04/16 1:20 pm

596

Diseases of specific organ systems

body dimensions and radiographic or neurologic signs. It
is believed by many that the degenerative changes seen
in this syndrome ultimately result from relative instability of the cervical spinal column.

Pathophysiology
Progressive spinal cord compression results from both
congenital stenosis and degenerative changes in the vertebral column. The changes can be listed as:

●● Hypertrophy and protrusion of the annulus fibro-

●●

●●

●●

●●

sus, often associated with ‘tipping’ of vertebrae.
This change is classically associated with DAWS in
Dobermanns.
Hypertrophy of the ligamentum flavum and dorsal
longitudinal ligament. These changes are also common in DAWS.
Hypertrophy of synovial membrane and formation
of synovial cysts at the articular facets, occurring in
giant breed stenotic myelopathy and associated with
remodeling of the facets.
Stenosis of the vertebral canal; historically this has
been described in giant breed stenotic myelopathy.
However, there is evidence that Dobermanns also have
a relative stenosis of their cervical vertebral canal.
Degenerative joint disease and remodeling of the
articular processes, commonly found in giant breed
stenotic myelopathy.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs include progressive ataxia, tetraparesis,
and, sometimes, neck pain (Figure 14.49). Signs in the
hindlimbs are more severe than the forelimbs. Dogs with
caudal cervical compression frequently have a short
14.49

Figure 14.49 An 8-year-old Dobermann with cervical vertebral
spondylomyelopathy (wobbler syndrome) presenting with
neck pain.

K22463_C014.indd 596

stilted forelimb gait with a dysmetric, disconnected
­hindlimb gait. Nerve root entrapment can cause forelimb
lameness and muscle atrophy; in particular, compression
of the suprascapular nerve can produce marked atrophy
of the supra- and infraspinatous muscles, making the
scapular spine easily palpable. Although typically this is
a chronic progressive disease, acute onset of severe signs
can occur.

Diagnosis
Survey radiographs of the cervical spine may show degenerative changes typical of this syndrome, but cannot be
used to identify sites of spinal cord compression. Stressed
views should not be taken as compression of the spinal
cord can be exacerbated. Myelography combined with
CT used to be the gold standard for diagnosis of cervical spondylomyopathy and for surgical planning. Linear
traction views of the myelogram are used to determine
whether compression can be addressed by distraction
and fusion of vertebrae (i.e. a dynamic lesion). However,
MRI has largely replaced CT and myelography. The advantages of MRI include greater accuracy at detecting spinal
cord compression and parenchymal disease in addition to
decreased morbidity associated with this imaging modality (Figures 14.50a–d).

Management
Dogs with neurologic deficits should be treated surgically,
as this is a chronic progressive disease. However, many
owners cannot afford, or do not wish, to have surgery performed; medical therapy can be considered in such cases
and in dogs with mild deficits. Medical management
includes treatment of pain with anti-inflammatory drugs
and muscle relaxants, and restriction of unmonitored
activity combined with controlled exercise and physical
therapy. Anti-inflammatory doses of corticosteroids have
been used to reduce vasogenic edema but do not appear
to influence the outcome. Acupuncture can be useful to
control chronic pain in some dogs. Dogs managed in this
way should be monitored weekly to biweekly to allow
early recognition of deterioration and recommendation
for surgical intervention.
The aims of surgery are to decompress and/or stabilize
the cervical spine. Surgical strategies include the ventral
slot (to remove disk material from the canal), distraction/stabilization techniques (to treat lesions responsive
to traction) (Figure 14.51), and dorsal laminectomy (to
remove dorsal compression or address multiple disk protrusions). Postoperative rehabilitation of patients is critical to their recovery and owners need to be fully informed
about the implications of rehabilitating a nonambulatory

23/04/16 1:20 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

597

14.50

a

b

d
Figures 14.50a–d (a) T2-weighted sagittal caudal cervical
MR image of the Dobermann in Figure 14.49. A ventrally
compressive lesion is seen over the disk space of C6/C7.
(b) Following mild traction applied to the neck, the MRI is
repeated and shows a concurrent mild reduction in the degree
of ventral compression, indicating a traction-responsive
lesion. (c) T2-weighted sagittal caudal cervical MR image of a
1-year-old Great Dane with chronic progressive tetraparesis.
Mild compression of the cord can be seen, as can central
cord hyperintensity related to the chronic compression.
(d) T2-weighted transverse MR image at the level of the
compression seen in 14.50c confirming that the compression is
due to articular process malformation (arrow) and concurrent
stenosis of the spinal canal.

c

14.51

large or giant breed dog. Rehabilitation includes passive
range of motion exercises and massage in the recumbent
dog, hydrotherapy, and controlled exercise. Recovery of
these dogs can be prolonged (6–12 weeks or more) due to
the chronic nature of the disease.

degenerative lumbosacral stenosis
Figure 14.51 Lateral postoperative radiograph of the cervical
spine of the dog with the traction-responsive compression in
Figure 14.50. A distraction fusion surgery has been performed
using cancellous screws and polymethylmethacrylate cement.

K22463_C014.indd 597

Definition/overview
Lumbosacral stenosis (cauda equina syndrome, lumbosacral malarticulation and malformation, lumbosacral instability, lumbosacral spondylopathy) is common in middle

23/04/16 1:20 pm

598

Diseases of specific organ systems

to old aged, large breed dogs and represents a plethora of
orthopedic abnormalities associated with the ­lumbosacral
anatomy. Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis is also being
recognized with increasing frequency in the cat.

Etiology
Neurologic abnormalities occur coincident with tissue
(joint capsule, interarcuate ligament, disk, bone, fibrous
adhesions) impingement on the cauda equina, the nerve
roots at the level of the foramina, or the vascular supply.
Transitional vertebrae have been identified as a predisposing cause of cauda equina syndrome in German
Shepherd Dogs and other breeds.

Pathophysiology
The pathologic process begins with Hansen type II IVD
degeneration followed by osteophyte formation of the
L7–S1 endplates and articular processes. The syndrome is
characterized by stenosis of the spinal canal from vertebral subluxation and/or stenotic intervertebral foramina.
Concurrent with compressive disease, underlying instability may further accentuate the clinical signs, especially
in active dogs.

gastrocnemius reflexes may be hyporeflexic. The withdrawal reflexes are reduced in the stifle and hock joints.
Less commonly, the pudendal and caudal nerves may be
involved. The pudendal nerve (S1, S2, and S3) innervates
the perineal region, including the external anal and urethral sphincters. The caudal nerves innervate the tail.
Decreased tail tone is assessed on palpation and inability
to wag. Other less common clinical signs include fecal and
urinary incontinence. If micturition dysfunction is suspected, it is important to closely evaluate sensory perception of the perineal region and the anal reflex.

Diagnosis
A diagnosis of lumbosacral syndrome is suspected from the
neurologic examination. Definitive diagnosis of degenerative lumbosacral stenosis is difficult because no one test has
100% specificity and sensitivity, leading to false-positive
and false-negative results. Dynamic imaging is important
to investigate mobility of the joint and concurrent changes
14.52

Clinical presentation
Neuroanatomic localization to the lumbosacral region is
determined by the neurologic examination based on signs
related to sensory, motor, and autonomic dysfunction.
Nonspecific observations include reluctance to rise and
hindlimb lameness. Neurologic signs commonly include
pain and motor dysfunction as a result of LMN weakness
(sciatic, pudendal, caudal nerves). Pain is the most consistent clinical sign and reflective of compressive or inflammatory processes affecting pain-sensitive structures
(nerve root, meninges, periosteum, and joints). It is the
opinion of the author that the pain primarily originates
from nerve root (radicular pain) compression (particularly
L7). The affected patient often stands with the hindlimbs
tucked under the caudal abdomen to flex the spine and
lessen the nerve root compression (Figure 14.52). Motor
dysfunction varies in severity. The patient may have mild
to severe gait and postural reaction deficits. The gait is
frequently short strided or shuffled. Postural reaction
deficits are often asymmetrical, depending on the degree
of cauda equina involvement. Reflex dysfunction of the
limbs commonly involves those muscles innervated by
the sciatic nerve (L6–S1 nerve roots but L7 and S1 provide
the major contribution), particularly the flexor and extensor muscles of the hock. The patellar reflex may appear
hyperreflexic due to loss of antagonism from the flexor
muscles (pseudohyperreflexia). The cranial tibial and

K22463_C014.indd 598

Figure 14.52 A Labrador Retriever with degenerative
lumbosacral disease exhibiting reduced tail tone, hindlimb
muscle atrophy, and a weak stance.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

in nervous tissue compression. Diagnostic procedures to
test for degenerative lumbosacral stenosis include electrophysiology, survey and contrast radiography, CT, and
MRI. Survey radiography is useful to rule out other causes
of cauda equina syndrome. Abnormal findings associated
with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis include: osteochondrosis of the sacral endplate; transitional vertebrae; spondylosis; subluxation; sclerosis of the endplates; and bony
proliferation of the articular processes.
Stress radiography (extension and flexion views) has
been used to identify underlying ‘instability’ of the lumbosacral junction; however, normal dogs might also have
evidence of such ‘instability’. MRI is superior to radiography for demonstrating dynamic compression of the neural tissues.
CT has the advantage of better soft tissue and bone
resolution. Cross-sectional, dorsal, and sagittal images
allow determination of lesion extent. The articular processes, IVDs, and foraminae can be evaluated. CT imaging
studies should be performed prior to injecting contrast
medium into the vertebral canal or subarachnoid space.
Abnormalities detected by CT include loss of epidural fat,
increased soft tissue opacity in the intervertebral foramen, bulging of the IVD, thecal sac displacement, spondylosis, narrowed vertebral canal, thickened articular
processes, and osteophyte formation on the articular processes in the intervertebral foramen.
MRI is superior to CT with regard to soft tissue definition (Figure 14.53). The spinal cord, CSF, IVDs, ligaments,
and nerve roots can be directly visualized. MRI may allow
early recognition of IVD degeneration and a more accurate assessment of epidural fat displacement, although
this is open to overinterpretation. Parasagittal and transverse views can provide evidence of stenosis within the
L7–S1 intervertebral foramina. As with radiography,
extension and flexion views of the lumbosacral spine
can provide evidence of dynamic disease. Importantly,
CT and MRI imaging findings may not correlate with the
14.53

599

severity of the clinical signs, and thus should not be used
to predict surgical outcomes or ­determine the prognosis.

Management
Indications for medical management include the first episode of clinical signs or intermittent pain. Management
consists of strict confinement for 8–14 weeks,
­anti-inflammatory medication using low-dose prednisolone or NSAIDs, and weight loss. The recovery rate with
medical management is between 24% and 50%. A recent
report described the use of methylprednisolone sodium
acetate (40 mg/ml) injections into the lumbosacral epidural space at a dose of 1 mg/kg. The treatment resulted
in clinical improvement in 79% and complete resolution of
clinical signs in 53% of dogs mildly affected by degenerative lumbosacral stenosis. The protocol included injections
at 0, 2, and 6 weeks, with additional injections as needed.
Indications for surgical management include failure
of medical management, severe pain, and moderate to
severe neurologic deficits (in particular incontinence).
Surgical techniques include decompression and excision
of the proliferative tissue, and fixation and fusion of the
lumbosacral junction. Surgical decompression is the most
common treatment, although distraction–fusion techniques may also be used if indicated. The most crucial
aspect of postoperative care is strict cage confinement for
8–12 weeks and a gradual return to fitness. It is important to institute controlled exercise as part of the physical
rehabilitation program. In addition, bladder management involves proper monitoring of bladder emptying to
avoid urinary tract infections. If the clinical signs resolve
with surgery, then the prognosis is fair to good. Dogs
with severe neurologic deficits and urinary and fecal
incontinence for more than a few weeks prior to surgery
have a guarded to poor prognosis. Rates of postoperative
improvement range from 41% to 95%.

spondylosis deformans
Definition/overview
Degenerative change associated with the vertebrae, most
often the vertebral bodies, easily seen on radiographs but
rarely a cause of clinical disease.

Etiology
Degenerative, often age-related change.
Figure 14.53 Sagittal T2-weighted caudal lumbar spinal MR
image of the dog in Figure 14.52 confirming marked neural
tissue compression at the L7/S1 intervertebral disk space
(arrow).

K22463_C014.indd 599

Pathophysiology
Spondylosis deformans is characterized by formation of
bony growths and bridges at the intervertebral spaces.
The condition is a common radiographic finding in older

23/04/16 1:21 pm

600

Diseases of specific organ systems

dogs along the thoracic and lumbar spine. Most likely
spondylosis is associated with degeneration of the annulus fibrosus of the IVD. Presence of spondylosis deformans
has been associated with type II IVDD and degenerative
lumbosacral stenosis; however, these diagnoses are often
made independent of the presence of spondylosis.

spinal synovial cysts

Clinical presentation

Etiology

Spondylosis rarely causes neurologic signs, but is occasionally associated with back pain.

Cysts originate from synovial joint lining of vertebral
joints.

Diagnosis

Pathophysiology

The lesion is radiographically identifiable (Figure 14.54).
The osteophyte formation usually does not compress the
neural tissue or encroach within the vertebral canal.

Spinal extradural synovial cysts and ganglion cysts arise
from the articular facets. Some authors have referred to
both structures as intraspinal cysts due to the confusion
of tissue origination. Pathogenesis of synovial cysts has
been associated with degenerative disease and trauma.
Increased mechanical stress and joint motion may predispose the thoracolumbar junction to osteoarthritis
and synovial cyst formation. Histopathology of the cyst
reveals fibrous connective tissue with a synovial cell
lining.

Management
NSAIDs or steroids have been reported to lessen spinal
discomfort in animals with severe ankylosing spondylosis. Spondylosis deformans is usually an incidental finding and is rarely associated with clinical signs, therefore
the prognosis is good.
14.54

Definition/overview
Spinal synovial cysts occur in the cervical spine of young
large breed dogs but more commonly involve the thoracolumbar region in older large breed dogs.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs are consistent with a progressive myelopathy and include paraspinal hyperesthesia.

Diagnosis
Radiographic findings include degenerative changes
and remodeling of the articular processes. Myelography
demonstrates spinal cord compression, especially on
the ventrodorsal view, with attenuation of the contrast
column medial to the articular processes. Attenuation
of the ventral and dorsal columns (giving an hourglass appearance) is also present on lateral projections.
The lesion is better defined using CT myelography
and MRI. Cysts will appear as hyperintense lesions
on both T2-weighted and STIR images (Figure 14.55).
Albuminocytologic dissociation is a consistent finding
on lumbar CSF analysis.

Management

Figure 14.54 Lateral radiograph of the lumbar vertebrae
demonstrating ventral bridging spondylosis.

K22463_C014.indd 600

The treatment often involves surgical decompression
and excision of the cyst. Surgical intervention is indicated with severe neurologic deficits and refractory pain.
A hemilaminectomy is often performed if one side is
affected. The cyst and any protruding disk material are
removed. Marked improvements in gait and neurologic
deficits occur post surgically.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

14.55

601

accumulation within the spinal cord. The pathogenesis
of SM appears to be multifactorial, as its dorsoventral
size and sagittal extent do not correlate well with a single morphologic abnormality. The location of the syrinx within the dorsal aspect of the spinal cord affecting
the dorsal horn is thought to be one mechanism behind
the development of pain, specifically neuropathic pain.
Neuropathic pain is secondary to disordered processing
of sensory information within the nervous system and
results in spontaneous pain, paresthesia, dysthesia, allodynia, or hyperpathia.

Clinical presentation
Figure 14.55 T2-weighted transverse spinal MR image showing
compression of the spinal cord by a laterally situated fluid-filled
synovial cyst (arrow).

ANOMALOUS DISEASES
chiari-like malformation syndrome and
­syringomyelia (see also brain disease section)
Overview/definition
CLMS, also known as caudal occipital malformation
­syndrome, and syringomyelia (SM) often occur together,
although both may occur independently of the other. SM is
a condition characterized by the presence of a ­fluid-filled
cavity (syrinx) or cavities within the ­parenchyma of the
spinal cord. CLMS and SM are most common in toy and
small breed dogs, best described in the CKCS and the
Brussels Griffon.

Etiology
In CKCSs, CLMS/SM is a hereditary condition, possibly
autosomal recessive with incomplete penetrance. CLMS
is caused by congenital hypoplasia of the supraoccipital
bone resulting in overcrowding of the structures within
the caudal fossa; this finding is in line with human studies. SM is secondary to abnormal CSF flow and is usually
associated with CLMS, although it may be associated with
other trauma, inflammation, and neoplasia.

Pathophysiology
The CSF, which normally moves through the foramen
magnum during systole of the cardiac cycle, becomes
turbulent as laminar flow is interrupted by obstruction at the craniocervical junction due to the CLMS. The
altered fluid flow in the subarachnoid space leads to fluid

K22463_C014.indd 601

Onset of signs may be acute or chronic in dogs ranging
from 6 months to 10 years of age, but no sex predisposition has been identified. Clinical signs can be seen in
dogs with CLMS alone and are usually related to neuropathic pain syndromes. In the presence of SM, neuropathic pain syndromes and neurologic deficits related to
spinal cord destruction can present variably. The most
common sign of CLMS/SM is pain, predominately isolated to the cervical region, occurring in 35% of affected
dogs and 80% of people with the similar condition. Dogs
may vocalize spontaneously without apparent stimulation or when the neck or shoulders are touched. Sensory
abnormalities, including rubbing of the face, chewing the
feet, and intolerance to neck collars or touch, have been
described in some dogs, especially evident during times
of stress or excitement. ‘Phantom scratching’, where the
dogs will attempt to scratch often without making contact with their skin, is the most notable manifestation
of these neuropathic pain abnormalities and has been
described in affected dogs, ranging from an infrequent
to a near constant problem. Other clinical signs include
scoliosis and neurologic deficits relating to cervical spinal
cord dysfunction; tetraparesis, sensory ataxia, and abnormal proprioceptive positioning in all limbs have been
noted in dogs with CLMS/SM. Intracranial signs, such as
facial paresis and vestibular dysfunction, have also been
reported. However, dogs may be completely asymptomatic for CLMS and/or SM. SM can be present in up to 44%
of clinically normal CKCSs and in 24% of clinically normal
Brussels Griffons.

Diagnosis
These structural abnormalities are best diagnosed with
MRI, but they may be clinically silent; therefore, their significance must be carefully considered when such abnormalities are discovered. SM is seen as hyperintensity

23/04/16 1:21 pm

602

Diseases of specific organ systems

on T2-weighted MR images and as hypointensity on
T1-weighted images; a prominent or dilated central canal
can be seen in some dogs. The extent of SM is very variable, with some cases exhibiting a focal cyst-like structure
most commonly in the dorsal cervical cord (predominantly gray matter) and others exhibiting multifocal,
multiloculated lesions throughout the entire spinal cord
(holocord syringomyelia) (Figure 14.56). Suggestive of a
­‘pre-syrinx’ is a local area of T2-weighted FLAIR hyperintensity associated with the central canal. It is important
to rule out other concurrent diseases as being the cause
of clinical signs, which can be difficult, but performing
CSF analysis is important. As CLMS/SM occurs in toy
breed and small dogs, it is essential to consider a CSF tap
to investigate the possibility of an inflammatory disease
and imaging to rule out disk disease. Evaluating the clinical significance of CLMS or SM MRI findings is difficult. In
addition to the 2-D measurements of skull and cerebellar
sizes, it has become apparent that volumetric ratios of the
caudal fossa size can be useful in supporting an association with clinical signs.

Management
Treatment may not be necessary in asymptomatic dogs
or dogs with mild nonprogressive signs. Dogs exhibiting pain, more severe neurologic deficits, or progressive signs can be treated either medically or surgically.
Typically, medical therapy is pursued initially, involving
the use of analgesics and drugs that reduce CSF formation.
Furosemide (1–2 mg/kg PO q12h) and prednisone (0.5–
1.0 mg/kg PO q24h, tapering dose) are frequently used.
Other treatments used in an attempt to decrease CSF production include acetozolamide and omeprazole. Treatment
of neuropathic pain with a drug such as gabapentin
(10–20 mg/kg PO q8h) is also an important aspect of therapy; pregabalin may be a useful alternative to gabapentin.
Approximately 70% of patients show some improvement, but it is rarely complete and it does not prevent
14.56

disease progression. If medical therapy does not
­alleviate the clinical signs, surgical decompression of
the foramen magnum has been suggested (suboccipital
craniectomy) and is the treatment of choice in people.
Foramen magnum decompression has been performed
in dogs with success rates reported at about 80%; however, recurrence is common in nearly half of cases in the
long term and neuropathic pain and the accompanying
signs of scratching may persist, requiring continued
medical therapy. Additionally, multiple surgeries may
be necessary if scar tissue develops at the surgical site,
obstructing CSF flow, although cranioplasty may reduce
the likelihood of this complication. Improvement may
not result in the reduction of syrinx size, which usually
persists.

arachnoid diverticula (subarachnoid cysts)
Definition/overview
Arachnoid diverticula (also known as subarachnoid cysts,
meningeal cysts, intra-arachnoid cysts, and leptomeningeal cysts) can cause compression of the cervical or thoracolumbar spinal cord.

Etiology
Congenital, traumatic.

Pathophysiology
Arachnoid diverticula occur in the intradural–­
extramedullary space. Thoracolumbar arachnoid diverticula more commonly occur over the caudal thoracic
vertebrae (T11–T13) and may expand over two vertebrae.
Age of onset in dogs with thoracolumbar cysts is older
than in dogs with cervical diverticula. Congenital forms
may be associated with other neural tube defects and
syringohydromyelia. Spinal arachnoid diverticula also
occur in cats.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs reflect a progressive spinal cord disease
based on the segmental location of the cyst; the condition
usually lacks paraspinal hyperesthesia. Incontinence
may be a prominent clinical feature.

Diagnosis

Figure 14.56 T2-weighted sagittal cervical spinal MR image.
A large centrally located fluid-filled cavity can be seen within
the spinal cord, representing syringomyelia.

K22463_C014.indd 602

Myelography is useful for detecting the diverticula within
the intradural space. On MRI the diverticula appear as
focal, well-circumscribed lesions that are isointense
to CSF on both T1-weighted and T2-weighted images
(Figure 14.57). MRI is more sensitive than CT in detecting
associated intramedullary lesions such as SM.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

14.57

603

projection from the cranial aspect of the body of the axis
and develops from a separate growth plate. The atlantoaxial and atlanto-occiptal region is prone to congenital
defects, which can predispose to this luxation:

●● Aplasia, hypoplasia, or dorsal angulation of the dens
(toy and small breeds of dog are predisposed to this
condition).
●● Congenital absence of the transverse ligament.
●● Incomplete ossification of the atlas.
Figure 14.57 T2-weighted caudal cervical spinal MR image
depicting a dorsal fluid-filled lesion (arrow) associated with the
spinal cord and subarachnoid space. This is often referred to as
a subarachnoid cyst or diverticulum.

Management
Surgical decompression of the spinal cord is the
recommended treatment. Various surgical procedures
­
involve spinal cord decompression and removal or drainage of the fluid-filled structure with fenestration or marsupialization of the dura mater. Dogs that have the cyst
marsupialized may have a better long-term outcome
than if the cyst is fenestrated. Conservative management
is indicated in dogs with mild neurologic deficits and
includes anti-inflammatory doses of prednisolone and
controlled exercise. The prognosis is good for young dogs
if treated soon after development of clinical signs. Dogs
older than 3 years of age and those with clinical signs for
a duration of >4 months have a poor long-term outcome
when treated with only fenestration of the cyst.

VERTEBRAL COLUMN MALFORMATIONS
atlantoaxial instability
Definition/overview
Subluxation of the atlantoaxial junction is a relatively
common problem in toy breed dogs and causes acute to
chronic tetraparesis, ataxia, and pain.

Etiology
Trauma, congenital malformation.

Pathophysiology
The atlas (first cervical vertebra) and axis (second cervical vertebra) are held together by ligaments that run
from the dens of the axis to the atlas and the skull, over
the dens binding it to the floor of the atlas (the transverse
ligament), and between the dorsal lamina of the atlas and
the dorsal spinous process of the axis. The dens is a bony

K22463_C014.indd 603

Clinical presentation
Onset of signs in dogs with the congenital form of the
disease usually occurs in young dogs (<2 years of age),
although problems can develop at any age. Signs can
develop acutely or gradually, and waxing and waning
of signs is often reported, presumably a reflection of
instability at the atlantoaxial junction causing repeated
injury to the spinal cord. Signs include neck pain (variably present), ataxia, tetraparesis, and postural reaction
and conscious proprioceptive deficits with normal to
increased muscle tone and myotatic reflexes in all four
legs. In severe cases, animals can present with tetraplegia and difficulty breathing and they may die acutely as
a result of respiratory failure. Some animals present with
seizure-like episodes that involve sudden onset of opisthotonus and vocalization, presumably reflecting intermittent compression of the spinal cord and nerve roots,
causing severe but transient pain and paresis.

Diagnosis
Atlantoaxial subluxation can be diagnosed from survey
radiographs of the cervical spine, although extreme care
must be taken when restraining and moving dogs in
which this disease is suspected. If the animal is sedated
or anesthetized, the head and neck should be supported
in slight extension to avoid further spinal cord injury.
On lateral radiographs an increased space can be seen
between the dorsal lamina of the atlas and the dorsal spinous process of the axis. In severe cases, malalignment
of the bodies of the atlas and axis is clearly visible. The
presence and size of the dens can be evaluated most accurately on ventrodorsal views. If there is no evidence of
subluxation on the lateral views, the neck can be carefully
flexed to see if there is instability (the space between the
dorsal lamina of the atlas and the dorsal spinous process
of the axis should be evaluated). It is preferable to do this
with fluoroscopy so that the movement can be monitored
to prevent accidental iatrogenic subluxation. Advanced
imaging is commonly performed to aid in decision
making for surgery. CT allows clear identification of the

23/04/16 1:21 pm

604

Diseases of specific organ systems

bony components of the atlantoaxial region, facilitating
­surgical planning for implant placement. MRI highlights
the spinal cord and brainstem parenchyma, allowing
diagnosis of concurrent abnormalities such as CLMS or
hydrocephalus, which might complicate recovery from
surgery (Figure 14.58).

Management
Dogs with mild signs can be treated conservatively by
placing an external splint for at least 6 weeks. The splint
must immobilize the atlantoaxial junction and so must
come over the head cranial to the ears and go back to
the level of the chest. The aim is to stabilize the junction while the ligamentous structures heal. The dog and
splint should be checked daily by the owner for signs of
decubital ulcers and checked weekly by the veterinarian,
with regular bandage changes if necessary (Figure 14.59).
Splint placement addresses instability and can produce
an immediate improvement, although severe displacement of the atlantoaxial junction may not be adequately

addressed. In one study, six of 16 dogs failed to improve
following splint placement and were euthanized, while
the remaining 10 dogs responded well and maintained a
good outcome 1 year after splint removal. Surgery is recommended in dogs with neurologic deficits, although it
can be associated with high perioperative morbidity and
mortality (Figure 14.60). Dorsal and ventral approaches
to the atlantoaxial junction have been described, but dorsal approaches, although requiring less dissection and
14.59

14.58
Figure 14.59 External stabilization of the neck requires a
ventral splint and bandaging, which needs to extend from the
mandible to the mid-thorax.
14.60

a

b
Figures 14.58a, b (a) Lateral radiograph of a Yorkshire Terrier
with acute-onset neck pain. There is a notable space present
between the dorsum of C1 and the dorsal arch of C2 compatible
with atlantoaxial subluxation. (b) Sagittal T2-weighted MR
image of the cranial cervical spine of the dog shown in 14.58a.
Marked cord compression can be seen associated with a
subluxation of the dens (*).

K22463_C014.indd 604

Figure 14.60 Lateral postoperative radiograph of the dog in
Figure 14.58. A ventral fixation approach using transarticular
pins, screws, and polymethylmethacrylate cement has been
used.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

605

retraction of important soft tissue structures such as the
esophagus, pharynx, and larynx, are associated with a
greater risk of causing spinal cord injury during surgery
and a higher incidence of implant failure. A neck splint
may be placed postoperatively while fusion occurs if transarticular screws alone are used. This is a problematic area
to repair surgically; bone quality is often poor, the bones
are small, movement of the vertebrae may cause additional injury to the spinal cord, and the pharynx and larynx can be damaged during retraction. There is a risk of
respiratory arrest and death in the perioperative period as
a result of additional spinal cord injury or inflammation of
the upper airways secondary to retraction. While this is a
serious disease, dogs treated surgically have an excellent
prognosis if they survive the 48-hour perioperative period.
Although reported surgical success rates range from 50%
to 90%, the majority report a mortality rate in the region of
20%, with the majority of deaths occurring either during or
immediately after surgery. As with all spinal cord diseases,
prognosis is worse in animals with severe and chronic
neurologic deficits. It has also been shown that prognosis
is better in young dogs (<24 months).

deficits, the nature of which is determined by the location
of the abnormality.

Vertebral anomalies

Spinal stenosis

Definition/overview

Definition/overview

Vertebral anomalies (e.g. hemivertebra, butterfly vertebra,
block vertebra, spina bifida) involve defects in formation of
the vertebra and segmentation defects. Congenital anomalies of the vertebral column may be associated also with
anomalies of the spinal cord (dysraphism) and/or other
organ systems (e.g. cardiovascular and urogenital). Spina
bifida is considered a form of spinal dysraphism and is
characterized by failure of the vertebral arches to fuse, with
or without protrusion of the spinal cord and meninges.

Spinal stenosis indicates a malformation of the spine
present at birth and occurs as a primary lesion or in association with other anomalies that predispose to stenosis.

Etiology
Congenital.

Pathophysiology
Vertebral anomalies are common in the brachycephalic
and ‘screw-tailed’ breeds of dog such as Bulldogs and
Boston Terriers, and the ‘tail-less’ cat, the Manx. If they
are associated with clinical signs, it can be due to associated osseous compression, disk disease, or associated soft
tissue abnormalities (subarachnoid diverticula).

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is suspected based on clinical signs, signalment,
and survey radiographic findings. Myelography and
cross-sectional imaging are useful for determining the
extent of compression, stenosis, or other possible spinal
cord and spinal column deformities. MRI is more sensitive for determining spinal cord involvement and associated defects of altered CSF flow (cyst, syrinx, edema).

Management
If clinical signs are nonprogressive, conservative management is recommended. Decompressive surgery is
recommended with clinical signs of compressive myelopathy. Likewise, spinal instability and malalignment
require vertebral stabilization techniques. The prognosis
is good for most vertebral anomalies because the majority of cases do not produce clinical signs. The prognosis
is considered guarded if signs of spinal cord dysfunction
are present. Multiple anomalies may exist concurrently.

Etiology
Congenital.

Pathophysiology
Relative stenosis refers to canal narrowing that does not
cause compression of neural tissue, whereas absolute
stenosis refers to a stenosis causing spinal cord compression. Dobermanns have a relative stenosis that most commonly involves the cranial thoracic vertebrae (T3–T6).
There have also been reports of thoracic vertebral stenosis in Bull Mastiffs, Great Danes, Basset Hounds, Dogues
de Bordeaux, and English Bulldogs.

Clinical presentation
Neurologic signs reflect the neuroanatomic localization
of the stenosis. Onset is usually insidious and progressive.

Clinical presentation

Diagnosis

Vertebral anomalies are often an incidental finding and
usually cause no clinical signs. Malformations involving the spinal cord are more likely to cause neurologic

Diagnosis is based on survey radiography that defines
associated vertebral anomalies but requires myelography
and/or cross-sectional imaging to determine the presence

K22463_C014.indd 605

23/04/16 1:21 pm

606

Diseases of specific organ systems

of stenosis. MRI of the spinal cord is recommended to
further delineate associated neural tissue anomalies or
abnormalities.

14.61

Management
Surgical decompression may relieve the compression;
however, associated vertebral and spinal cord anomalies
need to be taken into account. The prognosis is considered
guarded due to chronicity and presence of other anomalies.
The lack of information available with regard to surgical
follow-up makes it difficult to give an accurate prognosis.

NEOPLASTIC DISEASES
spinal meningiomas
Definition/overview
Tumors affecting the spinal cord are described based on
their location as extradural, intradural–extramedullary,
or intramedullary. Intradural–extramedullary tumors
include meningioma and nerve sheath tumors. Meningiomas affecting the spinal cord are most common in
the neck.

Figure 14.61 Transverse post-contrast T1-weighted MR image
at the level of C2 showing a strongly enhancing lesion markedly
compressing the cord (arrow) to a fraction of its normal size.
Surgical resection of the lesion was performed and confirmed a
meningioma.

Unknown.

surgery. Postoperative radiation therapy may be used
adjunctively to prolong survival in dogs with incompletely
excised tumors. Treatment with surgery and radiation therapy can result in an improved outcome and prevent recurrence. Surgical results are guarded when meningiomas are
associated with an intumescence, a ventral location, and
invasion of the neural parenchyma.

Pathophysiology

Nerve sheath tumors

Etiology

Spinal meningiomas are the most common primary spinal cord tumor in cats older than 8 years of age. The mean
age for spinal meningiomas in dogs is 9 years. Spinal
meningiomas in dogs are most common in the cervical
spinal cord, but can occur in any region of the spinal cord.

Clinical presentation
Meningiomas of the spinal cord in dogs and cats tend to
present with a progressive paraparesis. The clinical signs
represent the spinal cord region involved. Paraspinal
pain may or may not be present.

Diagnosis

Definition/overview
Peripheral nerve sheath tumors (PNSTs) are neoplasms
that arise from cells surrounding the axons in peripheral
nerves or nerve roots, and they are divided into benign
and malignant variants. Most PNSTs in dogs are anaplastic, have a high mitotic index, and an aggressive biological behavior, so they are designated as malignant PNSTs.
Malignant nerve sheath tumors are common in dogs,
but rare in cats. No sex or breed predilection has been
demonstrated for PNSTs in dogs. Most affected animals
are adults over 7 years of age, but younger animals may
also be affected.

Myelography
typically
shows
an
intradural–­
extramedullary compressive lesion. With MRI, these
Etiology
Unknown.
tumors are iso- to hypointense on T1-weighted images,
hyperintense on T2-weighted images, and demonstrate
Pathophysiology
strong, uniform contrast enhancement (Figure 14.61).
Malignant PNSTs in dogs most commonly affect the cauManagement
dal cervical (C6–C8) and the cranial thoracic (T1–T2) nerve
These lesions should be surgically explored because many
roots, although nerve sheath tumors have also been
meningiomas can be completely or partially removed and
described affecting the sciatic nerve and femoral nerve.
therefore may be associated with prolonged survival after
These tumors may have their origin in the nerve roots

K22463_C014.indd 606

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

or the brachial or lumbosacral plexi, or they may arise
from more peripheral locations in the nerves. Usually, the
tumor spreads slowly, both distally and proximally, and
may invade the vertebral canal, causing spinal cord compression and associated neurologic deficits. As the tumors
grow proximally they spread to neighboring nerves in
the plexus bundle, with a high percentage of dogs showing evidence of multiple nerve involvement at the time
of diagnosis. PNSTs are highly invasive locally, but they
rarely metastasize, although pulmonary metastasis in
advanced cases has been described.

Clinical presentation
Malignant PNSTs typically affect older dogs and have
been described occasionally in cats. Slowly progressive forelimb lameness or paresis and muscle atrophy
are the predominant clinical signs of malignant PNSTs
(Figure 14.62). In addition, pain on palpation of the limb
or axillary region may be encountered. A palpable axillary mass may be present in some cases, but it is not common. Enlargement of the affected limb has been described
in one case. Clinical signs progress slowly and orthopedic
disease is often suspected before a definitive diagnosis is
made. As the PNST spreads proximally and compresses
the spinal cord, neurologic deficits may develop in the
ipsilateral hindlimb, progressing to all four limbs. If the
dorsal cervical nerve roots are affected, animals may also
show cervical pain.
Unilateral, partial, or complete Horner’s syndrome
may appear if the cranial thoracic nerve roots are affected
by the tumor itself or if there is cord compression at this

14.62

607

point (Figure 14.63). Similarly, the ipsilateral cutaneous
trunci reflex may be absent due to invasion of the C8–T1
ventral nerve roots or compression of these spinal cord
segments.

Diagnosis
Orthopedic disease must be excluded by careful orthopedic examination and radiographs of the appropriate
joints. Complete blood work (CBC, serum biochemistry
panel), thoracic radiographs, and abdominal ultrasonography should be performed in any dog suspected of having
a malignant PNST in order to rule out metastatic disease
and assess general health status. Survey radiographs of
the spine are often normal. Oblique views may reveal
enlargement of the affected intervertebral foramen due
to pressure atrophy, caused by the thickened nerve root.
Occasionally, lysis of the affected vertebral bodies may be
observed. CT imaging allows visualization of some malignant PNSTs, and masses as small as 1.0 cm can be identified on contrast-enhanced CT scans. Enhancement of the
mass with iodinated contrast medium provides excellent
views, helps differentiate vascular structures, and allows
subtle differences in soft tissue opacity created by tumor
vasculature to be seen. MRI evaluation of the brachial
plexus or peripheral nerves provides excellent diagnostic images but again, not all PNSTs can be detected using
this imaging modality early in the course of the disease
(Figure 14.64).
Ultrasound examination of the affected limb may
allow visualization of large, hypoechogenic tubular
masses that displace vessels and destroy normal architecture, and ultrasound-guided fine needle aspirates of the
masses may be useful to reach a final diagnosis in some
14.63

Figure 14.62 A Yorkshire Terrier demonstrating left forelimb
root signature associated with a peripheral nerve sheath tumor.

K22463_C014.indd 607

Figure 14.63 Left-sided Horner’s syndrome comprising ptosis,
miosis, and third eyelid protrusion is seen in this adult cat.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

608

Diseases of specific organ systems

14.64

14.65

Figure 14.65 The lumbar plexus of a dog affected with an
extensive malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor.

Figure 14.64 Nerve root enhancement (arrow) associated with
a nerve sheath tumor is depicted on this transverse
post-contrast T1-weighted MR image at the level of C7.

cases. Electromyography reveals abnormal, spontaneous
electrical activity in the affected limb muscles and is of
great assistance in differentiating neurologic from orthopedic disease.

therapy, but it is unclear whether this positively affects
the prognosis, since these tumors are poorly responsive
to radiation. Despite aggressive management, the overall prognosis is poor for most cases of malignant PNSTs.
Recurrence rate after surgery is high. There is a tendency
for dogs with more proximally located tumors to respond
less favorably to surgery and to relapse earlier (1 month
for nerve root tumors and 7.5 months for plexus tumors)
than those with peripherally located tumors (>9 months
after surgery). Incomplete resection is common, indicating that grossly visible margins at the time of surgery are
frequently inaccurate indicators of tumor excision.

Vertebral body tumors

Managment

Definition/overview

Unfortunately, there is usually no curative treatment for
PNSTs. Complete surgical resection may be difficult due to
the invasive behavior of these tumors and the late detection of the disease in most cases. Tumors within the brachial plexus or peripheral nerves are treated with local
excision or amputation of the affected limb. Repeated
surgeries may be needed as recurrences are common.
In many instances, amputation of the limb is the only
option. Early diagnosis and aggressive surgical intervention are recommended to maximize the possibility
of complete tumor resection. Aggressive surgical resection at an early stage, if the tumor is peripheral, can be
curative (Figure 14.65). Amputation is only advisable
when the tumor is distal and there is no invasion of the
spinal canal. In addition, amputation is performed in
some cases just to prevent or avoid self-mutilation and
injuries to the limb in cases of loss of sensation or paresthesias. Surgery can be followed by a course of radiation

Tumors affecting the spinal cord are described based on
their location as extradural, intradural–extramedullary,
or intramedullary. Extramedullary tumors are the most
frequent and most commonly are primary vertebral
tumors.

K22463_C014.indd 608

Etiology
Unknown.

Pathophysiology
Vertebral body tumors are primary or metastatic tumors
most frequently reported in large and giant breed dogs.
Commonly described tumors in dogs include osteosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma,
plasma cell tumor, carcinoma, lymphoma, and liposarcoma. Small breed dogs have a higher rate of vertebral
metastasis than large breed dogs. In cats, the most commonly described vertebral body tumor is ­osteosarcoma.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

Primary vertebral body tumors will cause a secondary myelopathy by compression or direct spinal cord
invasion.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs may be focal or multifocal depending on the
extension of the tumor. Signs include pain and paraparesis or paralysis. Pathologic fractures of the vertebral body
result in an acute onset of neurologic deficits.

Diagnosis
Dagnosis is often based on survey radiographic findings, such as lysis and pathologic fractures secondary
to tumor destruction of the bone. Other supportive diagnostic techniques, such as CT, MRI, and myelography, are
used to determine lesion extent (Figure 14.66). MRI and
scintigraphy can be used to detect multiple metastases.
Fluoroscopic-guided needle aspiration or surgical biopsy
can be used to obtain a definitive diagnosis.

Management
Palliative treatment options include surgery, radiation
therapy, chemotherapy, or various combinations of the
three. A vertebrectomy with a bone allograft fusion
has been used for the treatment of a primary vertebral neoplasm in a dog. Decompression or stabilization
techniques are used in patients that are rapidly deteriorating. The overall prognosis is c­ onsidered guarded
14.66

609

for dogs and cats with vertebral neoplasia. Survival is
not impacted greatly by various treatments but is often
determined by the neurologic deficits at the time of
diagnosis.

thoracolumbar spinal tumor of young dogs
(spinal nephroblastoma)
Definition/overview
Canine nephroblastoma is an intradural–extramedullary
neoplasm in young dogs located between T10 and L2 in
the spinal cord. Occasionally, this tumor is extradural or
intramedullary.

Etiology
The origin of the tumor is unknown but descriptions have
included medulloepithelioma, embryonal nephroma,
nephroblastoma, and Wilm’s tumor (Figure 14.67).

Pathophysiology
Primary spinal nephroblastoma is thought to arise from
embryonic tissue trapped within the dura during fetal
development. Histologic appearance may vary. Usually,
neuroepithelioma involves one kidney or the spinal cord,
but not both. Rarely, renal neuroepithelioma will secondarily metastasize to the spinal cord, bone marrow, and
spinal canal.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of spinal nephroblastoma are dependent
on tumor location. The most common neurologic findings include progressive paraparesis and ataxia. Clinical
signs of spinal neuroepitheliomas consist of a progressive
asymmetrical T3–L3 myelopathy.

14.67

Figure 14.66 Transverse post-contrast T1-weighted MR
image at the level of the T2 vertebra clearly demonstrating a
large irregular lesion associated with the vertebral body and
compressing the spinal cord. The lesion was confirmed to be a
chondrosarcoma.

K22463_C014.indd 609

Figure 14.67 Histopathologic section of a nephroblastoma
stained with hematoxylin and eosin.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

610

Diseases of specific organ systems

Diagnosis
Survey radiography of the spine shows no abnormalities. Myelography is useful for determining location and
lesion extent. CT or MRI of the spine can better assess vertebral and spinal cord involvement (Figures 14.68a, b).
Abdominal radiography and ultrasonography can
assess for primary renal involvement if present.
Immunohistochemistry is used to identify the mesenchymal or epithelial components of neuroepithelioma.
Staining with Wilm’s tumour 1 (WT-1) antibody can support a diagnosis of nephroblastoma.

time of diagnosis. Long-term prognosis is poor because of
tumor recurrence.

spinal lymphoma
Definition/overview
Extradural lymphoma is the most common tumor to
induce spinal cord dysfunction in cats and occurs less
commonly in dogs.

Etiology
Unknown.

Management
If detected early, surgical excision can lead to long-term
survival with limited morbidity. Adjunct irradiation is
considered when total surgical resection is not possible,
and may provide a good functional outcome. Overall
prognosis is uncertain because of the limited number of
cases reported. Prognosis is considered guarded to poor
because spinal cord involvement is often extensive by the
14.68

Pathophysiology
Feline leukemia virus has been implicated and is an
important factor associated with lymphoma in young cats.
Feline spinal lymphoma has a predilection for the thoracic
and lumbar spinal cord. Most affected cats are <2 years of
age but older animals may also be affected. Lymphoma in
cats commonly is found in extraneural sites. Renal lymphoma is likely to relapse in the CNS. Lymphoma is the
most commonly diagnosed malignant tumor in dogs, but
involvement of the nervous system is relatively unusual.
Involvement of the CNS is more common than the peripheral nervous system in both dogs and cats.

Clinical presentation
a

Neurologic signs are related to the location of the lymphoma and are often insidious but there can be an acute
exacerbation with rapid deterioration. Often, cats with
lymphoma have multifocal signs reflective of multiple
lesions in the CNS. The most common initial clinical sign
in cats is paraparesis, with pain and other nonspecific
abnormalities such as anorexia, lethargy, weight loss, and
respiratory tract infection.

Diagnosis

b
Figures 14.68a, b (a) Sagittal T2-weighted and (b) transverse
post-contrast T1-weighted MR images of a nephroblastoma
(arrows) compressing the spinal cord in the thoracic spine.

K22463_C014.indd 610

The safest and most reliable method of obtaining a diagnosis of lymphoma in the CNS may be by confirming
the presence of lymphoma in other organ systems. The
abdominal organs and bone marrow are commonly aspirated but may not be affected. CSF analysis may detect
the presence of malignant lymphocytes, but lack of this
finding cannot rule out CNS involvement (Figure 14.69).
Survey spinal radiography may detect bone involvement.
Myelography is useful for determining lesion extent and
determining extradural, intradural–­
extramedullary,
or intramedullary involvement. Spinal lymphoma is
detected most commonly as an extradural lesion. MRI
may detect intramedullary lesions (Figure 14.70).
A definitive diagnosis can be determined from cytologic

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

14.69

611

INFLAMMATORY DISEASES
diskospondylitis/osteomyelitis
Definition/overview

Figure 14.69 Cytologic analysis of CSF from a dog with a CNS
lymphoma.
14.70

Diskospondylitis is due to infection of the intervertebral
disk and adjacent vertebral endplates; if the infection is
confined to the vertebral body, it is called vertebral osteomyelitis or spondylitis. The sites most commonly affected
are L7–S1, caudal cervical, midthoracic, and thoracolumbar spine. The infection is usually slowly progressive but
can result in acute signs due to secondary pathologic vertebral fractures and IVDD. Its most common clinical sign
is that of spinal pain but neurologic signs are seen and
related to the localization. An association with empyema
has been documented in several dogs, which may represent an extension of the disease and should be considered
when considering diagnostic tests and/or when dealing
with a refractory case.

Etiology

Figure 14.70 Sagittal post-contrast T1-weighted cervical spinal
cord MR image of a dog with a spinal cord lymphoma (arrow).

examination of the contents of fluoroscopic-guided fine
needle ­aspirations or a surgical biopsy.

Management
Therapies used in combination or alone include surgical
resection, focal irradiation, and systemic chemotherapy
(e.g. cytarabine or methotrexate and corticosteroids).
A laminectomy procedure provides an accurate histologic
diagnosis and adequate decompression. Surgical treatment is necessary for cats that fail to respond rapidly to
chemotherapy. Duration and remission times vary among
studies. Intramedullary lymphoma is difficult to treat
because of poor penetration across the blood–brain barrier of some chemotherapeutic agents. Effectiveness of
chemotherapy for lymphoma with neural involvement
still remains to be determined. In general, the prognosis
for hindlimb paresis or paralysis in cats is guarded to poor.
The median duration of complete or partial remission in
six cats with spinal lymphoma and severe neurologic deficits, treated with vincristine sulfate, cyclophosphamide,
and prednisolone, has been reported as 14 weeks (range
5–28 weeks) and 6 weeks (range 4–10 weeks), respectively.

K22463_C014.indd 611

Coagulase-positive Staphylococcus spp. (S. intermedius or
S. aureus) are the most common etiologic agents associated with canine diskospondylitis; other less commonly identified organisms include Streptococcus spp.,
Escherichia coli, Actinomyces spp., and Brucella canis, as
well as Aspergillus spp. Young German Shepherd Dog
bitches seem to be predisposed to aspergillosis, whereas
young Basset Hounds contract diskospondylitis due to
systemic tuberculosis.

Pathophysiology
Hematogenous spread from distant foci of infection (urogenital tract, skin, dental disease), penetrating wounds,
surgery, or plant material migration can cause direct
infection of the disk space or vertebrae, the latter of
which is usually seen at the level of L2–4 at the insertion of the diaphragmatic crus. Immunosuppression due
to factors such as hyperadrenocorticism is considered a
predisposing cause. Infection causes osseous lysis, proliferation, and soft tissue reaction, which can cause neural
compression.

Clinical presentation
Spinal pain is the most common initial clinical sign in
this disease, which is most frequently seen in large intact
male young to middle aged dogs. With proliferation of
inflammatory tissue, compression of neural tissue can
lead to ataxia, paresis, and occasionally paralysis dependent on where the lesion is located. Although it can occur
in any animal, the condition is less common in toy and

23/04/16 1:21 pm

612

Diseases of specific organ systems

14.71

chondrodystrophoid breeds of dog, and rare in cats.
Purebred dogs seem more commonly affected than mixed
breeds. Approximately 30% of dogs have signs of systemic
illness such as fever and weight loss.

Diagnosis
Hematological changes are usually not present unless
there are concurrent conditions such as endocarditis.
Urine cytology may reveal bacterial or fungal agents.
Blood and urine cultures should be performed in all
suspected cases and are positive in up to 75% and 50%
of cases, respectively. Ideally, these should be performed
prior to initiating antibiotic therapy. Serology for brucellosis should also be performed, especially in view of its
zoonotic potential; this has been reported to be positive
in up to 10% of cases.
Definitive diagnosis is usually made with spinal radiographs, although radiographic change may not be evident in the first 2–4 weeks of infection (Figures 14.71a–c).
The most commonly affected site is L7–S1, but other frequently affected sites include the caudal cervical/cranial
thoracic vertebrae and the thoracolumbar junction. As
this can be a multifocal disease, the entire spine should
be radiographed. Radiographic evidence of disease
includes narrowing of the disk space, accompanied by
subtle irregularity of both endplates, through to gross
lysis and osseous proliferation of the adjacent vertebral
bone, and even fractures. Radiography can also be used
to monitor the response to treatment or the progression
of the disease, although clinical progression is equally
important, as radiographic change can lag behind clinical improvement.
CT can identify subtle endplate erosion and paravertebral soft tissue swelling more readily than radiography. Post-myelogram CT clearly defines compression
of the neural tissues by infected tissues, as does MRI.
Diskospondylitis appears to have increased signal
intensity on T2-weighted images and decreased signal intensity on T1-weighted images, changes also seen
in the paravertebral tissues in all cases. MRI can also
highlight the inflammation in the surrounding muscles
(Figures 14.71b, c).
If urine and blood culture and brucellosis serology
have not identified an etiologic agent in cases of diskospondylitis, percutaneous needle aspiration of the disk
space can be a safe procedure to obtain tissue for bacterial
and fungal cultures and cytology. However, this procedure requires general anesthesia, sterile surgical preparation, and fluoroscopic or CT guidance of the needle,
and is usually only performed in patients unresponsive
to initial broad-spectrum antibiotics. The procedure has
been documented to be up to 75% sensitive; open biopsy

K22463_C014.indd 612

a

b

c
Figures 14.71a–c (a) Lateral radiograph of the lumbosacral
joint of a dog with diskospondylitis. Note the endplate
sclerosis and lysis. (b) Sagittal and (c) transverse post-contrast
T1-weighted MR images of the thoracic spinal column of a
dog with multifocal diskospondylitis illustrating the marked
vertebral body uptake of contrast (arrows).

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

of the vertebrae may be considered if needle ­aspiration
is unrewarding. This has yielded positive cultures in
approximately 80% of patients. In all cases, diagnostic
investigation of potential systemic infectious foci should
be considered. This should include abdominal ultrasonography for prostatic or renal disease, thoracic radiographs
for pulmonary disease, and cardiac ultrasonography for
endocardial disease.

Management
Once radiographic evidence of diskospondylitis is
present, treatment for the common potential pathogen S. intermedius infection may be started. Initial
treatment of diskospondylitis consists of antibiotics
(potentiated amoxicillin or cephalexin), cage rest, and
analgesics. Results of cultures may require alteration of
this choice.
IV antibiotics should be considered if severe neurologic compromise or signs of sepsis are present; otherwise, oral antibiotics are acceptable. However quickly
the patient improves, continuation of the antibiotics for
8–16 weeks is recommended. Resolution of clinical signs,
such as pain and fever, should be expected within 5 days
of initiating therapy; however, complete neurologic
resolution may take 2–3 months. Residual deficits may
remain, but persistent pain indicates an active disease,
and these patients should be treated with an additional
antibiotic and considered for further diagnostics, as they
may have a potential fungal infection or surgical lesion.
Diskospondylitis associated with Aspergillus spp. has
been treated with itraconazole (5 mg/kg of body weight
PO q24h), although long-term reports of success are lacking, with the belief being that chronic recurrence and
progression are likely.
Surgical decompression is rarely needed, and should
only be considered in refractory cases or those with
severe neurologic deficits that show no sign of improvement within 3–5 days. Although internal fixation can be
acceptable even at the site of an infection, it may be more
appropriate to consider external skeletal fixation, as has
been successfully described in dogs with lumbosacral
diskospondylitis.
The prognosis for this disease is generally very good
unless the etiology is fungal, there are multiple lesions,
vertebral fracture or subluxation occurs, or there is
endocarditis. The potential for recurrence should be
considered, especially if brucellosis has been diagnosed
or an underlying immunosuppressive condition is present. Residual neurologic deficits are possible, and in
those cases that have severe neurologic deficits associated with the infection, the prognosis should initially
be guarded.

K22463_C014.indd 613

613

steroid-responsive meningitis–arteritis
Definition/overview
Steroid-responsive meningitis–arteritis (SRMA), also
termed necrotizing vasculitis, juvenile polyarteritis syndrome, corticosteroid-responsive meningitis/meningomyelitis, aseptic suppurative meningitis, panarteritis,
and pain syndrome, is a noninfectious inflammatory
condition reported in Beagles, Bernese Mountain Dogs,
Boxers, German Short-haired Pointers, and Nova Scotia
Duck Tolling Retrievers, but is noted and probably occurs
in other medium to large dog breeds.

Etiology
An immunologic cause of this disease is suspected, resulting in a vasculitis. The etiopathogenesis is unknown but
an infectious cause has been suggested, although none as
yet identified.

Pathophysiology
Notably increased levels of CSF and serum IgA, increased
CSF and blood B-cell/T-cell ratios, and CSF IL-8 levels are
all thought to be compatible with immune system stimulation. High CD11a expression on polymorphonuclear
cells appears to be an important factor in the pathogenesis of SRMA and may be involved in the enhanced passage of neutrophils into the subarachnoid space leading
to meningitis and clinical signs. Matrix metalloproteinase-2 seems to also be involved in the neutrophilic
invasion into the subarachnoid space. Involvement of
such molecular markers provides a potential therapeutic target. Subsequent to neutrophilic invasion of the
subarachnoid space, there is development of a fibrinoid
arteritis and leptomeningeal inflammation in the spinal cord and, to a lesser degree, the brain. With chronic
progression of the lesions, rupture and hemorrhage
of the weakened vasculature may be present, accompanied by thickened leptomeninges with less severe
inflammation.

Clinical presentation
Affected dogs are often young adults (8–18 months old)
but may be of any age, and are usually febrile and hyperesthetic, with cervical rigidity and anorexia (Figure 14.72).
Neurologic deficits can be seen in the chronic form of
this disease and, rarely, severe motor dysfunction may
result from spontaneous bleeding into the subarachnoid
space. Some dogs (up to 46%) with immune-mediated
polyarthritis, especially Bernese Mountain Dogs, Boxers,
and Akitas, may show similar clinical signs to dogs with
SRMA and have concurrent meningitis. Some dogs may
have concurrent glomerulonephritis.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

614

Diseases of specific organ systems

spinal empyema

Diagnosis
A marked peripheral neutrophilia with a left shift may
be seen at the time of the clinical signs. CSF often reveals
a marked neutrophilic pleocytosis and protein elevation;
cell counts of >100 cells/µl are common. Neutrophils are
nondegenerative, unlike bacterial meningitis. In the
majority of dogs with either acute or chronic disease,
there are elevations of IgA levels in the CSF and the
serum, although this is not specific for this disease. IgA
CSF concentrations are significantly higher in dogs with
SRMA compared with other disease categories, with the
exception of inflammatory CNS disease, and so are considered nonspecific.

Management
The prognosis can be good if dogs are treated early and
aggressively with immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids, with up to 80% of cases going into long-term
remission. Infectious diseases should be ruled out before
this treatment is initiated. The treatment is long term,
and has been reported to be required for over 2 years in
some dogs; however, after this time, serum and CSF IgA
levels were still elevated in some dogs, so are not considered valuable for disease monitoring. Monitoring of
CSF cell count in dogs with this condition is a sensitive
indicator of success of treatment. In refractory cases or in
patients having steroid-related side-effects, alternative
immunomodulation therapy should be considered, such
as azathioprine.

14.72

Definition/overview
Spinal empyema is defined as an extensive accumulation
of purulent material in the epidural space of the vertebral
canal. This is an uncommon condition.

Etiology
Direct extension of osteomyelitis or diskospondylitis is
the main cause of the infection in veterinary medicine.
Infection could also be subsequent to surgery, foreign
bodies, and trauma.

Pathophysiology
Extension or introduction of an infectious agent into the
spinal canal can cause a purulent accumulation, which
can result in compression of the spinal cord and systemic
signs of an infectious disease.

Clinical presentation
Characteristic clinical signs are a high fever, acute progressive spinal hyperesthesia, and progressive myelopathy.

Diagnosis
Hematology reveals an inflammatory leukogram. Blood
cultures can be positive. Staphylococcus and Streptococcus
spp. are commonly isolated. Radiography may reveal
vertebral physitis or diskospondylitis. Diagnosis is aided
by myelography, CT, or MRI with identification of extradural compression that extends over multiple spinal
cord segments. MRI is most sensitive for assessment of
severity and extent of changes associated with infection
of the paraspinal muscle and other soft tissue structures
(Figure 14.73). Cross-sectional imaging can further help
guide surgical therapy.
14.73

Figure 14.72 A Beagle with severe neck pain associated with its
sterile meningitis.

K22463_C014.indd 614

Figure 14.73 Epidural soft tissue material compressing the
cord (arrow) and confirmed to be empyema can be seen on
this sagittal post-contrast T1-weighted MR image of the caudal
cervical spine.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

615

Management

Diagnosis

Effective treatment is rapid institution of an appropriate
antibiotic therapy and surgical drainage of the epidural
fluid. Surgery is the treatment of choice because it allows
for spinal cord decompression, drainage of the infected
material, and direct culture of the organism. Dogs with
spinal empyema have a good outcome when treated with
surgery and the appropriate long-term antibiotic therapy
based on culture and sensitivity.

canine distemper viral myelitis

Diagnosis of CDV infection is based on history and c­ linical
signs. A definitive antemortem diagnosis of CDV is difficult to obtain. MRI may provide evidence of white matter involvement in the brain and spinal cord. Clinical
laboratory findings and CSF analysis are often nonspecific. Immunofluorescent techniques for CDV antigen on
conjunctival tissue, CSF, urine, skin, or blood can facilitate diagnosis but lack sensitivity. Multiple methods
of detection increase diagnostic suspicion of CDV. PCR
and analysis of CSF-specific IgG levels and determining
the CSF:serum ratio can be used to detect chronic CDV
infections.

Definition/overview

Management

CDV is a Morbillivirus within the family Paramyxoviridae
that can cause focal or diffuse lesions in both the gray
and white matter of the CNS. Focal or diffuse demyelination can occur in the white matter of the spinal cord.
Neurologic forms often occur as the only clinical manifestation in dogs with intermediate levels of viral
immunity.

The treatment of CDV myelitis is often unsuccessful.
Corticosteroid therapy of short duration may provide
some remedy. Clinical signs typically wax and wane over
time followed by a more rapid progression. The prognosis
is considered poor for recovery.

INFLAMMATORY SPINAL CORD DISEASES

Etiology
CDV.

Pathophysiology
The type of lesion produced in the CNS depends on host
immunity and the age and duration of infection. The type
of lesion ranges from acute polioencephalomyelopathy
with glial and neuronal necrosis in immature or immuno­
deficient dogs to more chronic leukoencephalomyelopathy with demyelination in older or immunosuppressed
dogs. Demyelination is therefore a more prominent feature in the chronic stages of disease.

Clinical presentation
Respiratory, enteric, neurologic, and ocular manifestations have been described in naturally occurring disease.
Respiratory and enteric forms of the disease are more
common in puppies or severely immunosuppressed adult
dogs. Neurologic signs, whether acute or chronic, are usually progressive. Neurologic signs vary with the area of
the CNS infected but spinal cord signs can predominate.
Clinical signs of CDV myelitis are focal or diffuse, with the
T3–L3 spinal region more frequently involved. Paraspinal
hyperesthesia can occur as a result of meningeal inflammation. Myoclonus (involuntary twitching of muscles)
can present without other neurologic signs, but as the
spinal cord disease progresses there may be UMN signs in
the affected limbs.

K22463_C014.indd 615

feline infectious peritonitis, myelitis, and
meningitis
Definition/overview
FIP is a common viral disease in cats caused by the ubiquitous feline enteric coronavirus. FIP is an immune complex forming disease involving virus, antibodies, and
complement, which results in multifocal inflammatory
lesions affecting the nervous system.

Etiology
Mutated feline coronavirus.

Pathophysiology
Histologic findings include granulomatous inflammation
of the meninges, ependymal cells, and choroid plexus.
FIP occurs in two forms: non-effusive (dry) and effusive
(wet). CNS involvement is seen most commonly with the
dry form.

Clinical presentation
Most cats infected are <2 years of age but cats of any age
can be infected. Clinical signs are often insidious and
present with focal, diffuse, or multifocal distribution.
Signs often are vague and reflect multiple organ system involvement. Keratic precipitates can be present on
the corneas (see Figure 14.14). Systemic signs include
pyrexia, weight loss, dullness, and anorexia. Commonly
recognized spinal signs are hindlimb or generalized
ataxia and paraspinal hyperesthesia. When the virus

23/04/16 1:21 pm

616

Diseases of specific organ systems

affects the spinal cord, the resulting pathology includes
hydromyelia and myelitis. Other areas of the CNS such as
the spinal cord can be involved, but not as commonly as
intracranial signs.

Diagnosis
Confirmation of FIP antemortem is very difficult. Biopsy
confirmation of infected tissue is the only method to
definitively diagnose FIP. CSF analysis is abnormal
with an elevated total nucleated cell count and protein
levels. The white blood cell differential often reflects a
neutrophilic pleocytosis but cellular distribution can be
variable. CSF protein concentration can be extremely
elevated (1,000–2,000 mg/dl). Results of serologic testing are difficult to interpret reliably. The most useful antemortem indicators of disease are a positive
anti-coronavirus titer in CSF, a high serum total protein
concentration, and findings on imaging that include
periventricular enhancement, ventricular dilatation,
and hydrocephalus.

Management
FIP is an incurable disease and clinical management
involves supportive and palliative care. Use of corticosteroids and other immunosuppressive drugs may slow
the progression of the disease. Various other drugs such
as antiviral and immunomodulating (interferon) drugs
have been used but none have been shown to be effective.
The prognosis for cats with FIP is poor.

Clinical presentation
The neurologic signs of protozoal infection reflect
disseminated or progressive multifocal disease. Dogs
­
as young as 4 weeks of age may develop a progressive
asymmetrical or symmetrical paraparesis from T. ­gondii
or N. caninum infection. The organism infects the lumbosacral nerve roots and muscles and often causes a
myelitis and/or meningitis. These dogs may have a
­‘bunny-hopping’ gait or present with severe rigid extension of the hindlimbs (Figure 14.74). The limbs are rigid
because of muscle fibrosis and tendon contracture. The
patellar and withdrawal reflexes are lost and severe muscle atrophy often ensues. Rarely, the disease progresses
rapidly to ­tetraparesis and respiratory paralysis.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is suspected based on history and clinical
signs. Electromyography shows diffuse fibrillation potentials and sharp waves in the lumbar paravertebral and
hindlimb musculature. CSF analysis shows a mixed
cell or mononuclear pleocytosis and an elevated protein concentration, occasionally positive for organisms
(Figure 14.75). Histology of the muscle and identification of the organism confirms the diagnosis. Serology for
T. gondii and N. caninum is often positive, and PCR analysis of the CSF can confirm the diagnosis.

Management

protozoal myelitis

Early treatment for 2–4 weeks with combinations of
trimethoprim–sulfadiazine or ormetoprim sulfadimethoxine and clindamycin may improve clinical signs.

Definition/overview

14.74

Protozoal infection can cause a focal or ­disseminated
myelopathy
in
dogs
and
cats,
respectively.
Meningoencephalomyelitis and myositis are common
lesions associated with Neospora caninum infection. Rapid
ascending myelitis is more common with N. caninum
infection. Many previously reported cases of Toxoplasma
gondii are now thought to be due to N. caninum.

Etiology
N. caninum and T. gondii.

Pathophysiology
Infection can occur in utero, by ingestion of oocysts (due
to fecal contamination), or by ingestion of bradyzoites
(in muscle). Although subclinical infection is common,
clinically significant protozoal infections tend to occur in
immunocompromised or young animals, and can affect
muscle, peripheral nerves, and the CNS.

K22463_C014.indd 616

Figure 14.74 A Labrador Retriever puppy exhibiting hindlimb
hyperextension associated with a Toxoplasma infection of the
local nerves and muscles.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

14.75

Figure 14.75 Cytologic analysis of CSF from a dog with
Toxoplasma gondii infection revealed intracytoplasmic
organisms in many cells (arrows).

Pyrimethamine may be added to the regimen but can
cause bone marrow suppression in young animals. Early
antibiotic treatment may improve clinical signs but
recovery is often incomplete. Poor prognostic indicators
for resolution of clinical signs include rapidly progressive
disease, signs of multifocal CNS disease, hindlimb hyperextension, and a long time interval between onset of clinical disease and treatment.

NEUROMUSCULAR DISORDERS
Clinical signs
The classical clinical sign of neuromuscular disease is
weakness. A paretic gait is usually manifested as a stilted
stride that becomes progressively shorter with accompanying ventroflexion of the neck, reluctance to walk or run,
lying down, and collapse. If ataxia is present, this suggests
a UMN disorder or a sensory neuropathy. Following rest,
muscle strength may greatly improve, but such a finding is
not consistent. In between episodes, animals may be completely normal or clinical signs of weakness may persist.

Lesion localization
A thorough history and physical and neurologic examination are essential to determine if weakness is a result
of a neuromuscular disease or other systemic disorder.
Metabolic and systemic diseases, cardiorespiratory disease,
orthopedic, and central neurologic causes of weakness
should be ruled out. It is important to approach the patient
in a thorough and logical manner, excluding diseases by
utilizing the least complex and least invasive tests first.
It is best to perform a standardized clinical examination so that a full physical and neurologic examination is
consistently performed. A practical format used for the
general examination includes inspection and palpation of
muscles and nerves, passive motion of joints, percussion
of muscles and tendons, sensory testing, and gait analysis.
Muscle atrophy or hypertrophy can be readily
observed at rest, as can spontaneous muscle activity

K22463_C014.indd 617

617

such as fasciculations or tremors. Weakness can often
be observed at rest; however, it is easier to detect with
moderate walking activity. Weakness of the paraspinal
muscles can result in abnormal postures including thoracic kyphosis and scoliosis. Extraocular, laryngeal, and
pharyngeal muscles should also be examined at this
time, particularly if the history is suggestive of dyspnea
or dysphagia. A complete neurologic examination should
be performed in all patients with a history of weakness,
exercise intolerance, or collapse.
Gait disturbances can require close observation. An
abnormal gait will result from weakness of any of the
principle flexor or extensor muscles of the limbs, in
addition to any structural abnormalities of the articular surfaces, joint capsules, or ligaments. A normal gait
also requires coordination by the CNS, which stimulates
or inhibits flexors, extensors, adductors, and abductors
for counteracting gravity. In general, gait abnormalities
result from (1) pain, (2) muscle weakness, (3) reduced
range of joint motion, (4) weakness of UMN or LMN origin, (5) spasticity, (6) dystonia, (7) rigidity, and (8) ataxia.
The gait should be observed from both sides as well as
from front and back, with ample ambulating space. There
are four phases of the gait that should be inspected: palmar or plantar strike (as the foot meets the floor), midstance, push off, and mid-swing. The examiner should
note the rhythm, symmetry, and strength of strides, the
base width of the gait, and the duration of the phases.
The base width is the distance between the feet during
the strides; assessment is subjective but a base width
larger than the width of the trunk can suggest sensory
deficits causing the ataxia.
Exercise testing in muscle disorders provides the
means to assess exercise capacity quantitatively, to reproduce exercise-induced symptoms, and to investigate the
pathophysiology of exercise limitations. Exercise is a
powerful tool for evaluating the integrity of the metabolic pathways that power muscular work and for assessing the physiologic responses that are linked to the state
of muscle energy metabolism. Thus, exercise testing is
particularly useful in the investigation of disorders of
muscle energy metabolism. In addition, exercise can be
utilized to assess objectively the effectiveness of treatment in metabolic myopathies.

Neurodiagnostic investigation
The diagnostic plan is dependent on the localization of
signs, as well as their suspected underlying mechanism.
As some of these problems are episodic, their frequency
must be taken into account and it should be recognized
that many of the tests will need to be performed at the

23/04/16 1:21 pm

618

Diseases of specific organ systems

time of an ‘episode’. Most neuromuscular disorders,
­however, will result in continual signs, which may vary
in severity based on the level of activity.
The following tests should be considered for all cases
with weakness or collapse, particularly if a neuromuscular disorder is suspected.

Video footage
If the episodes are so infrequent that they are not observed
by the clinician, the owners should attempt to capture the
event on videotape. Observation of the event is critical
to the diagnosis. Without observation, the nature of the
event must be surmised by listening to the ‘eye-witness’
description offered by the owner.

Minimum database
Comprehensive hematology, serum biochemistry (including CK, lactate, and electrolytes), urine analysis, a fecal
examination, and a resting electrocardiogram, as well as
thoracic and abdominal radiographs, should be considered the minimum essential database. A thyroid panel
and an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation
test should also be considered, as neuromuscular disease
may be the first and only manifestation of endocrine disorders. Resting blood pressure assessments should also
be performed if there is any concern about a cardiorespiratory disease and peripheral vascular pulses should
always be palpated to evaluate the potential of peripheral
vascular compromise.

Serum creatine kinase
CK is a specific enzyme marker of myofiber damage and
the one most frequently used in the diagnosis of muscle
diseases. CK is often increased in necrotizing, inflammatory, and dystrophic myopathies and is usually normal
in muscle diseases in which necrosis is not a feature (e.g.
myotonia). The enzyme is very labile and so is nonspecific. As the half-life is only about 2 hours, the magnitude
and persistence of increased CK activity is an indication
of severity and activity of an underlying muscle disease.
However, this enzyme can be elevated following IM injections, surgery, prolonged recumbancy, and even anorexia
in cats. Conversely, muscle disease should never be ruled
out based on a normal CK level.

concentrations are not affected by nonspecific types of
skeletal muscle damage, a generalized disease of muscle
affecting the myocardium could elevate this enzyme. This
could be potentially helpful in the future as a prognostic
marker based on extent of disease.

Myoglobin
Myoglobin present in the urine (myoglobinuria) usually
indicates severe muscle damage, frequently rhabdomyolysis following trauma, toxins, infections, and malignant hyperthermia. However, a correlation does not exist
between serum CK and myoglobinuria and so it is considered an insensitive test. Recurrent myoglobinuria may be
detected in inherited metabolic myopathies and in muscular dystrophy. Myoglobin is toxic to the renal tubules
and can cause acute kidney injury.

Serology and PCR
Investigations of infectious diseases may require extensive serologic tests and their interpretation may be
difficult but, depending on the potential for exposure,
serology should be performed on all possible infectious
candidates (particularly Toxoplasma gondii, Neospora
caninum, Hepatozoon spp. and Leishmania spp.) depending on geographic locale and travel history. Serology for
autoimmune conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis,
systemic lupus, and myasthenia gravis may be warranted
if suspected. Antibodies against the acetylcholine receptor (AChR) should be measured in all dogs with acquired
megaesophagus and dysphagia. Testing blood with PCR
methods for these infections is likely to be more sensitive
and specific, if it is available.

Electrophysiology
Extensive electrophysiologic testing may be required to
confirm the precise lesion localization of the disease if a
neuromuscular abnormality is suspected. An abbreviated
needle electromyography (EMG) test may be worthwhile
in the initial investigations, as it can quickly aid identification of an axonal or muscular disease. This is particularly helpful in cases with obvious muscle hypertrophy
or atrophy. Repetitive nerve stimulation and single fiber
EMG should be considered for neuromuscular junction
assessment (Figure 14.76).

Cardiac troponin I

Advanced imaging

Troponin is located in myofibrils and is the regulatory
protein of contractile skeletal and cardiac muscle. Cardiac
muscle can be affected by generalized myopathies including muscular dystrophy, mitochondrial myopathies,
and necrotizing myopathies. Although cardiac troponin

Unless a CNS abnormality is suspected, it may not be necessary to consider spinal radiographs, CT, or MRI studies. Thoracic radiographs can assist with the diagnosis
of megaesophagus and associated aspiration pneumonia. Fluoroscopy or contrast-enhanced radiography may

K22463_C014.indd 618

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

14.76

Figure 14.76 Electrophysiologic assessment of the nerves
in the forelimb. Stimulating needles are placed proximally in
close association to a specific nerve and recording electrodes
are placed distally in the interosseous muscles to detect the
resultant action potentials.

be helpful to evaluate the function of the esophagus if
enlargement is not obvious on plain survey radiographs
and swallowing if dysphagia is present. Cardiac ultrasonography may be required if a cardiorespiratory condition is suspected.
MRI and CT scans have recently been utilized to document the presence of muscle pathology, particularly on
post-contrast images. The location of the contrast uptake
within the muscles detected on MRI or CT can assist with
choosing suitable areas for a more high-yield biopsy,
which is important in early onset, localized, or patchy
myopathies.

Cerebrospinal fluid analysis

619

14.77

Figure 14.77 A linear skin incision exposes subcutaneous fat
and shiny underlying muscle fascia. The fascia needs to be
incised, which will allow a small piece of muscle to be sampled
for histopathologic assessment.

The muscle biopsy is of utmost importance in the diagnosis of most muscle diseases, particularly the inherited
diseases.

NEUROPATHIES
breed-related neuropathy
Definition/overview
Inherited and breed-related neuropathies are rare diseases that usually affect young animals and can produce
generalized motor, mixed motor and sensory, pure sensory, and/or autonomic deficits.

A CSF tap may help to rule out CNS diseases as well as
diffuse inflammatory conditions of the nerve roots, but
rarely is it a specific test and rarely will it be helpful in
cases of neuromuscular collapse. Evaluation for infectious diseases can be achieved with serologic techniques
or with PCR analysis of the CSF.

Etiology

Muscle and nerve biopsy

Clinical presentation

If a neuromuscular disease is suspected, a muscle or nerve
biopsy can provide a specific diagnosis of the underlying
cause (Figure 14.77). Since a peripheral nerve can react
in only a limited number of ways to a variety of insults,
the biopsy in most instances just confirms the presence
of axonal degeneration, demyelination, abnormalities
of supporting structures, inflammation, or infiltrative
neoplasia. However, a nerve biopsy can provide information on regeneration, remyelination, and degree of fiber
depletion and fibrosis, which are important for prognosis.

Typically, progressive LMN paresis develops, often
affecting the hindlimbs first, but eventually involving
the forelimbs. The concurrent development of laryngeal paralysis and megaesophagus is recognized as a
syndrome called laryngeal paralysis polyneuropathy
complex. This syndrome has been reported in young
Rottweilers, Dalmatians, Leonbergers, white coated
German Shepherd Dogs, and Pyrenean Mountain Dogs
amongst others; it is now recognized that older dogs with
idiopathic laryngeal paralysis, in particular Labrador

K22463_C014.indd 619

Unknown, suspected genetic in many breeds.

Pathophysiology
Progressive, usually chronic, degeneration of the myelin
and/or the axons of sensory and/or motor fibers.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

620

Diseases of specific organ systems

Retrievers, also suffer from a more generalized neuropathy that is likely h
­ ereditary. Several different breeds of
cat are also reported to have hereditary neuropathies.
Familial sensory neuropathies are particularly
unusual but have been reported in English Pointers,
English Springer Spaniels, French Spaniels, and Longhaired Dachshunds, with sporadic reports in other
breeds of dog. Dachshunds present with nociceptive
deficits, mild ataxia, and loss of conscious proprioception. These dogs have been reported to self-mutilate
their penis and dribble urine. The disease in English
Pointers and French and English Spaniels is more
severe and more specific to nociception. They lose nociception in their distal limbs around 3–8 months of age
and as a result lick, chew, and even autoamputate their
digits. These dogs do not have conscious proprioceptive
deficits.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by recognition of typical breed, age of onset,
and presentation and ruling out other disorders by electrophysiologic evaluation of nerve function and nerve
biopsy.

Management
Therapy is limited to symptomatic management of signs
in most diseases. This includes laryngeal tie back in dogs
with upper airway obstruction secondary to laryngeal
paresis/paralysis and physical therapy to maintain range
of motion and muscle mass. One exception is hyperchylomicronemia in cats, which can be treated successfully by
feeding a low-fat, high-fiber diet. It is important to recognize problems and diagnose the cause of signs in animals
used for breeding.

endocrine neuropathy
Definition/overview
Endocrine diseases that are known or suspected to cause
a peripheral neuropathy include diabetes mellitus, hypoglycemia (most commonly as a result of insulinoma in
dogs), hypothyroidism, and hyperadrenocorticism. These
diseases are associated with chronic progressive diffuse
weakness with or without systemic signs of the specific
endocrine disease.

Pathophysiology
Poorly controlled diabetes mellitus causes distal axonal
degeneration, with the longest peripheral nerves affected
first.

Clinical presentation
The most common manifestation of diabetes mellitus is
a sciatic neuropathy in cats causing a plantigrade stance
in the hindlimbs at rest and when walking. Affected cats
retain the ability to ambulate but hock flexion is absent
when the withdrawal reflex is tested. As the signs progress, they also develop a palmigrade stance. Although
pathologic changes and sporadic cases of neuropathy have
been detected in diabetic dogs, it is usually a subclinical
problem in this species. However, when it does occur, it
resembles a degenerative myelopathy, which will reverse
with improved diabetic regulation. Hypothyroidism has
been reported to be a cause of weakness in dogs as a result
of a generalized peripheral neuropathy. In addition, idiopathic neuropathies such as facial or laryngeal paralysis,
peripheral vestibular syndrome, and megaesophagus
have been linked to hypothyroidism.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of diabetic neuropathy is strongly suspected
in animals with poorly controlled diabetes and classic neurologic findings. Definitive diagnosis is made by
electrophysiologic studies and nerve biopsy. Although
axonal degeneration can be present in severely affected
animals, the most common findings are abnormalities in
Schwann cells and myelin. Diagnosis of hypothyroidism
is made by measurement of serum total and free T4 and
thyroid-stimulating hormone levels.

Management
Prognosis for full recovery of peripheral nerve function
associated with diabetes mellitus is good in most cases.
Restoring normoglycemia prevents progression and in
most cases may result in complete resolution of neurologic signs. Supplementation with thyroxine may reverse
the signs of generalized peripheral neuropathy associated with hypothyroidism over 2–3 months, but laryngeal and esophageal abnormalities usually persist.

insulinoma

Etiology

Definition/overview

Diabetes mellitus, hypoglycemia (most commonly as
a result of insulinoma in dogs), hypothyroidism, and
hyperadrenocorticism.

Chronic, severe hypoglycemia (<3 mmol/l [54 mg/dl]) is
almost invariably associated with insulinomas in dogs
and can result in a generalized neuropathy.

K22463_C014.indd 620

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

621

Etiology

Etiology

Pancreatic beta cell tumor.

The etiology of CIDP is unknown but it appears to be
­similar to chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy in humans.

Clinical presentation
The most common neurologic signs result from the effects
of hypoglycemia on the CNS (seizures, weakness, exercise
intolerance, and collapse). However, persistent hypoglycemia may also cause a distal peripheral neuropathy
that manifests initially as a stiff gait, particularly in the
hindlimbs, but progresses to more obvious signs of a generalized peripheral neuropathy with prominent sciatic
deficits.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on documention of hypoglycemia with
concurrent inappropriate hyperinsulinemia in the presence of the clinical signs and associated with a pancreatic mass, documented with ultrasound or MRI or surgical
exploration (Figure 14.78) and histopathology following
resection.

Management
Treatment of the insulinoma may improve the gait
depending on the extent of the underlying disease.

inflammatory diseases
chronic inflammatory demyelinating
polyneuropathy

Pathophysiology
CIDP is an apparently immune-mediated disease in which
the inflammatory reaction is focused on peripheral nerve
myelin.

Clinical presentation
Signs can relapse intermittently and can progress from
paraparesis to tetraplegia. Shifting lameness, a plantigrade stance, and ventroflexion of the neck have been
described in cats, along with megaesophagus and regurgitation. Leg tremors and laryngeal and facial paralysis
have been noted in dogs.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is reached by a combination of electrophysiologic studies and nerve biopsy. Typically, motor nerve
conduction velocity is reduced. There is multifocal para­
nodal demyelination in teased nerve fiber preparations,
and thinly myelinated fibers are visible on semithin
sections. Electron microscopy reveals macrophages
stripping myelin, and the presence of demyelinated
and remyelinated fibers. There is also a mononuclear
infiltrate.

Management

Definition/overview
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy
(CIDP) causes slowly progressive LMN tetraparesis in
adult dogs and cats with no gender or breed bias.

Treatment consists of immunosuppression with
­prednisone (initial dose of 2 mg/kg PO divided q12h for
1–2 weeks followed by gradual tapering over a period
of weeks). Most cases respond favorably to this regimen,
although some eventually relapse and become steroid
resistant.

14.78

polyradiculoneuritis
Definition/overview
Polyradiculoneuritis (inflammation of peripheral nerves
and nerve roots) is probably the most common peripheral
neuropathy of dogs and cats.

Etiology

Figure 14.78 Insulinoma (arrow) as viewed at surgery in a dog.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C014.indd 621

The disease can be subclassified according to cause as
Coonhound paralysis, (seen in North America, with
onset of signs 7–10 days after raccoon bites), idiopathic
polyradiculoneuritis, and post-vaccinal polyradiculoneuritis (extremely rare). An important association in

23/04/16 1:21 pm

622

Diseases of specific organ systems

man is concurrent infection with a specific serotype
of Campylobacter jejuni, but a variety of other infectious agents can also trigger the disease in humans,
including Toxoplasma gondii. Recently, it was shown
that dogs with idiopathic acute polyradiculoneuritis
are more likely to have positive titers for T. gondii than
control dogs.

Pathophysiology
Signs are caused by an inflammatory reaction to axons
and myelin sheaths, which is most intense at the level
of the ventral nerve root. Electrophysiologic findings in
dogs suggest that it is primarily a motor axonopathy.

protozoal neuritis
Definition/overview
Infection with the protozoal organisms Toxoplasma gondii
and Neospora caninum can cause an intense polyradiculoneuritis in dogs, accompanied by a myositis.

Etiology
Protozoal infection.

Pathophysiology

Affected dogs suffer from an acute ascending paralysis that progresses over 2–4 days to LMN tetraparesis
or plegia. Spinal hyperesthesia has been noted in some
dogs and CNs can become involved, leading to dysphonia
and facial weakness. Severe cases may suffer respiratory
failure.

Clinically significant protozoal infections affect young
or immunocompromised dogs. Dogs are both definitive
and intermediate hosts for Neospora spp., with cattle,
sheep, goats, and other mammals also acting as intermediate hosts. Cats are the definitive host for Toxoplasma
spp., with most mammals serving as intermediate hosts.
Infection can occur transplacentally (common for N. caninum), by ingestion of protozoal cysts from infected secondary hosts, and by ingestion of oocysts shed in feces
(common for toxoplasmosis).

Diagnosis

Clinical presentation

The number of diseases that cause acute onset of LMN
tetraparesis/tetraplegia is limited and polyradiculoneuritis should always be suspected when this clinical
picture occurs. Other diseases to consider include botulism and, in the USA and Australia, tick paralysis. EMG
reveals spontaneous electrical activity consistent with
denervation (fibrillation potentials and positive sharp
waves); nerve conduction velocities are dispersed and
reduced, with nerve roots more severely affected than
the distal nerve. Definitive diagnosis is established
with a nerve biopsy.

Clinical signs can be extremely variable as a result of
infection of muscle, peripheral nerve, and the CNS.
Typically, the hindlimbs are affected first and the combination of myositis and neuritis causes rigid extension
of the limbs, with severe muscle atrophy and contractures developing quickly. However, multifocal CNS signs
can be present and a cerebellar syndrome has also been
reported.

Clinical presentation

Management
Treatment is focused on supportive care and rehabilitation. Corticosteroid administration is not beneficial. The
pulmonary function of recumbent animals must be monitored closely. If hypoventilation is suspected, an arterial
blood gas analysis should be performed to determine
whether mechanical ventilation is necessary. Animals
should be turned and passive range of motion exercises
and massage of limbs should be performed at least four
times a day. If pulmonary function is unaffected, with
adequate supportive care most animals will recover over
a period of 3–6 weeks. However, the need for mechanical
ventilation, the presence of aspiration pneumonia, and
severe muscle atrophy with development of contractures
all worsen the outcome.

K22463_C014.indd 622

Diagnosis
Definitive diagnosis can be made by identification of the
organisms in muscle or nerve biopsies, combined with
serology. Serology alone can be confusing with a high rate
of false-positive titers, particularly in the case of toxoplasmosis. PCR analysis of CSF may provide a more specific diagnosis but the sensitivity of this test is unknown.

Management
Treatment of protozoal infections can be attempted
using clindamycin. However, a combination of trimethoprim/sulfadiazine and pyremethamine is more
effective at actually killing the organisms, and penetrates the CNS well. Animals on this protocol can be supplemented with folic acid; azithromycin can be added
as it is effective at killing intracellular organisms.
Prognosis depends on the severity of clinical signs and
muscle contractures. Recovery of normal function is

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

unlikely, although institution of treatment can p
­ revent
progression of signs. If treatment is initiated while
­
signs are still mild, the prognosis is better, but relapses
can occur.

toxic diseases
botulism
Definition/overview
Botulism intoxication can result in an acute onset of rapidly progressive diffuse neuromuscular signs. Multiple
dogs can be involved at the same time depending on the
source and accessibilty of the toxin.

Etiology
There are several forms of the botulinum toxin produced
by Clostridium botulinum, but botulinum C is the only
form associated with canine disease.

Pathophysiology
Botulism is caused by absorption of the botulinum toxin
following ingestion of spoiled carrion or raw meat. The
botulinum toxin produced by C. botulinum is taken up
at the neuromuscular junction and prevents synaptic
release of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction
of cholinergic nerves. Botulinum toxins, like tetanospasmin, are zinc endopeptidases, and botulinum C binds to
the presynaptic protein SNAP 25.

Clinical presentation
Botulism causes LMN tetraparesis that starts in the
hindlimbs as mild weakness, but progresses to tetraplegia in severe cases. CNs are often involved, producing
facial paresis, dysphonia, megaesophagus, and regurgitation. Autonomic signs such as mydriasis and dry
eye are variably present. Onset of signs usually occurs
over 2–4 days and is often preceded by a history of
dietary indiscretion (usually consuming spoiled meat)
and vomiting or diarrhea. Botulism is extremely rare
in cats.

Diagnosis
History and clinical signs are indicative of the disease.
Electrophysiologic studies may be supportive of the diagnosis. Reduced motor nerve conduction velocity has been
reported suggesting that there is a concurrent neuropathy. Definitive diagnosis is difficult to establish. The presence of botulinum toxin in the serum, feces, or vomitus
may be detected using a specific antitoxin to perform a

K22463_C014.indd 623

623

neutralization test in mice, and use of an ELISA has been
reported, demonstrating an increase in serum titers to
botulinum neurotoxin type C, 3 weeks after onset of signs.
Typically, the toxin is no longer detectable by the time
neurologic signs are evident.

Management
Treatment is supportive and recovery occurs over a
period of approximately 3 weeks. Recumbent dogs
should be turned regularly, kept clean and dry, and
their bladder expressed if necessary. Megaesophagus
and regurgitation should be managed by intermittent
suction of the esophagus by means of a nasoesophageal
tube, antacids (e.g. famotidine) to decrease acidity of
stomach contents (decreases esophagitis and effects of
aspiration), and antibiotics for aspiration pneumonia if
necessary. Ampicillin, aminoglycosides, erythromycin,
ciprofloxacin, and imipenum interfere with neuromuscular conduction and should be avoided. If megaesphagus is present, the dog should be fed while held or
propped with the head up, and that position maintained
for approximately 30 minutes after feeding. Arterial
blood gas analysis should be performed to check for
hypoventilation in tetraplegic animals and in animals
that may have aspirated. Passive range of motion exercises and massage should be performed every 6 hours
while the animal is recumbent. If pulmonary function
is not adversely affected, dogs have a good prognosis
with adequate nursing. If aspiration pneumonia or
hypoventilation develops, the prognosis is grave, but
recovery can occur if appropriate ventilatory support
can be provided.

tick paralysis
Definition/overview
Attachment of a tick is associated with an acute onset of
progressive diffuse neuromuscular disease. It is encountered commonly in the USA and more severe forms occur
in Australia and Africa.

Etiology
In the USA, Dermacentor andersoni and D. variabilis are the
primary ticks involved. In Australia, the disease is produced by Ixodes holocyclus.

Pathophysiology
Certain species of female ticks contain a toxin within their
saliva that causes presynaptic blockade of ­acetylcholine
release and a flaccid tetraplegia.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

624

Diseases of specific organ systems

Clinical presentation

Clinical presentation

Signs appear after the tick has been attached for 3–5 days
and progress over 1–3 days. They usually resolve within
an equal period following removal of the tick, except in
the case of the Australian tick, where signs can progress
following tick removal.

Several forms of MG have been described in dogs
including:

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on identifying the tick on physical
examination, particularly in large long-haired animals.

Management
Tick removal manually or using an insecticide can lead to
recovery within 24 hours.

myasthenia gravis
Definition/overview
Immune-mediated myasthenia gravis (MG) is a relatively common neuromuscular disease affecting dogs
and, occasionally, cats. Acquired MG has been observed
in dogs older than 3 months of all breeds, but particularly in German Shepherd Dogs, Golden Retrievers, and
Labrador Retrievers. In one report, the relative risk of
acquired MG in different breeds of dog was highest in
Akitas. Newfoundlands and Great Danes may be predisposed to a familial form of acquired MG. A bimodal age
of onset (<5 years and >7 years) has also been reported
in affected dogs, and spayed females may have heightened risk. In cats, Abyssinians and the closely related
Somalis seem to be overrepresented and gender is not a
risk factor in cats.

Etiology
MG is an immune-mediated disease.

●● Focal MG, with regurgitation, megaesophagus, and/or
dysphagia being the only clinical signs. The incidence
ranges from 26% to 43% of all cases of MG.
●● Generalized MG, with severe exercise intolerance and
megaesophagus, is reported in up to 57% of dogs with
MG (Figure 14.79).
●● An acute fulminating form of generalized MG with a
rapid onset of paralysis and megaesophagus.
Up to 43% of dogs with MG may not have clinically detectable limb muscle weakness. Approximately 7% of dogs
with MG have generalized weakness without esophageal or pharyngeal dysfunction. Generalized weakness without megaesophagus or dysphagia occurs in
approximately 30% and 20% of feline cases, respectively.
Generalized weakness associated with thymoma occurs
in approximately 26% of cats with MG, while focal forms
of MG, including megaesophagus and dysphagia, without
signs of generalized weakness, occur in approximately
15% of affected cats. While affected dogs may develop a
stiff choppy gait, in which the stride shortens until they
crouch in sternal recumbency and rest their head on their
forepaws, cats with MG are usually hypotonic, ‘floppy’,
and reluctant to walk. After rest, dogs walk normally
for a short period before repeating the cycle. Many animals have facial weakness (repeated stimulation of the
palpebral reflex causes it to diminish) and are unable to
close their eyelids (accompanied by lack of menace and
absent palpebral reflex). Third eyelids may be protruded.
Neurologic examination may reveal normal sensation
and intact tendon reflexes but diminished withdrawal

Pathophysiology
MG is characterized by failure of neuromuscular transmission due to a reduction in the number of functional
nicotinic AChRs on the postsynaptic membrane of the
neuromuscular junction. This deficiency of functional
receptors reduces the sensitivity of the postsynaptic membrane to the neurotransmitter acetylcholine.
Acquired canine MG is an immune-mediated disease
caused by production of autoantibodies (predominantly
IgG) directed against muscle AChRs at the neuromuscular junction. Based on experimental and human clinical
studies, MG involves both B and T cells. Complementmediated destruction of the postsynaptic membrane of
the neuromuscular junction and antibody-induced blockade of AChR function occur.

K22463_C014.indd 624

14.79

Figure 14.79 Lateral thoracic radiograph of a dog with
megaesophagus.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

reflexes, poor postural reactions, and proprioceptive
deficits. There is a greater incidence of mediastinal
­
­thymoma in cats with MG (25.7%) than in dogs (3.4%).

Diagnosis
A presumptive diagnosis of MG may be made by the resolution of muscle weakness following IV injection of edrophonium chloride (0.1 mg/kg in dogs, with a maximum
5 mg dose; 0.2–1.0 mg total dose in cats). This test may
be useful in diagnosing focal myasthenia if a decreased
or absent palpebral reflex responds to edrophonium.
A negative test does not rule out MG – either focal or generalized. Occasionally, this test causes a cholinergic crisis of bradycardia, profuse salivation, miosis, dyspnea,
cyanosis, and limb tremors, which can be reversed with
atropine (0.05 mg/kg IV). Electrodiagnostics in the form
of repetitive stimulation and single fiber EMG can assist
in the diagnosis, although the tests lack sensitivity and
specificity. However, lengthy anesthesia is necessary and
this may be contraindicated in a critical patient.
Diagnosis of MG is confirmed in both dogs and cats
by the demonstration of circulating AChR antibodies
in a serum sample. Reactive antibodies can usually be
demonstrated in the sera of approximately 98% of dogs
with acquired MG and in most affected cats. Antibody
elevations in dogs and cats are specific for MG, whether
it is acquired, paraneoplastic, or concurrent with
another autoimmune disease. In the absence of immunosuppressive therapy, there is a good correlation in
dogs between the clinical course of MG and the AChR
antibody titer. Immunosuppressive therapy for longer
than 7–10 days will lower antibody titers, so a thorough history is important to establish prior medication
administration. Antibody titers may be negative early
in the course of disease and so retesting is suggested
if clinical signs were recent in onset. Seronegative MG
may occur if low-titer and high-affinity antibodies are
bound to muscle AChRs in a range undetectable by the
standard serum assay.

Management
Treatment should begin with oral anticholinesterase
drugs (pyridostigmine bromide 0.5–3 mg/kg q12–8h). The
drug dosage should be started at the low end to avoid
cholinergic crisis, and can then be modified based on
response. As noted above, cholinergic crisis manifests
itself as a combination of bradycardia, profuse salivation, urination, diarrhea, dyspnea (bronchospasm, bronchosecretion), miosis, cyanosis, and limb tremors. If oral
treatment is not possible due to severe regurgitation,
injectable neostigmine can be given (0.04 mg/kg IM q6h).

K22463_C014.indd 625

625

If limb muscle strength has not returned to normal
following anticholinesterase treatment or if intolerable
side-effects of cholinergic excess are noted, and if there is
no evidence of aspiration pneumonia, alternate day lowdose corticosteroid therapy should be initiated (0.5 mg/kg
PO q48h). Immunosuppressive dosages of corticosteroids
should be avoided early in the disease, as this can exacerbate weakness, but the steroid dose can be increased every
2 weeks up to an immunosuppressive daily dose (2 mg/kg)
if necessary. Once a state of clinical remission is achieved,
the dose is reduced by 50% every 2–4 weeks while monitoring carefully for relapse. If there is no response to
immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids, azathioprine
can be added to the regimen (2 mg/kg PO q24h).

MYOPATHIES
NONINFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES: ACQUIRED
endocrine myopathies
steroid myopathy
Definition/overview
Chronic corticosteroid therapy may result in dramatic
muscle atrophy and weakness, particularly in dogs.
Steroid myopathy may be overlooked in patients receiving steroid treatment for disorders that produce weakness, such as inflammatory myopathies or CNS diseases.

Etiology
Chronic corticosteroid therapy.

Pathophysiology
The major actions of glucocorticoids are to increase muscle
protein catabolism and inhibit synthesis of myofibrillar
proteins. Protein synthesis is inhibited primarily in type
II muscle fibers and so net protein loss is greatest in these
fibers. Inhibition of protein synthesis is dependent on the
dose of steroids administered. Steroid myopathy is also
associated with alterations in muscle carbohydrate metabolism, due in part to steroid-induced insulin resistance.

Clinical presentation
Animals with steroid myopathy commonly have other
clinical signs of glucocorticoid excess; skin and hair
coat changes are typical. Patients rarely develop severe
clinical weakness with <4 weeks of steroid administration. Muscle atrophy, particularly of the masticatory
muscles, may occur within 2 weeks of steroid therapy
(Figure 14.80). It has been reported that steroid myopathy

23/04/16 1:21 pm

626

Diseases of specific organ systems

14.80

Etiology
Hyperadrenocorticism.

Pathophysiology
The myopathy found in Cushing’s disease has been
attributed to glucocorticoid excess, as described above
for steroid myopathy. It has been suggested that elevated
levels of ACTH may also be myopathic.

Clinical presentation

Figure 14.80 Marked hindlimb muscle atrophy is seen in this
dog confirmed to have an underlying steroid myopathy.

is more common after administration of the fluorinated
corticosteroids such as triamcinolone, betamethasone,
and dexamethasone.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of steroid myopathy necessitates exclusion of
other causes of generalized muscle disease, in addition to
evidence of long-term steroid administration and muscle biopsy confirmation of disease. The typical pattern of
type II fiber atrophy may be identified early in the course
of steroid myopathy with muscle biopsy.

Management
The treatment of choice for iatrogenic steroid myopathy is steroid dose reduction. Obviously, this can only be
achieved if the condition that warranted treatment with
corticosteroids is safely controlled. Conversion to a nonfluorinated steroid preparation and alternate day treatment are recommended. Improvement may be seen but
can take many weeks or longer. Because of the catabolic
effect of corticosteroids, optimizing nutritional status is
important. Protein supplementation in patients with a
loss of muscle mass is recommended. Physical therapy or
mild exercise may be useful in prevention and treatment
of muscle weakness and wasting in patients receiving
glucocorticoids. Androgens can partially antagonize the
catabolic actions of glucocorticoids.

Most affected dogs are middle aged; females are predisposed. Poodles and the smaller breeds are also overrepresented. Affected dogs often, but not always, have
characteristic signs of hyperadrenocorticism, in addition
to generalized muscle atrophy, but with a stiff gait and
hypertrophy of the proximal appendicular muscles. Of the
cats that have been reported with Cushing’s syndrome, the
majority are middle aged or older (average 10–11 years)
and are usually of mixed breed. Approximately 70% of the
cats are female. No distinct myopathy has been reported
in these cats but muscle wasting is a prominent finding. Some dogs will have generalized muscle weakness
and atrophy on presentation rather than ­
generalized
stiffness.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis necessitates exclusion of other causes of generalized muscle disease, in addition to biochemical confirmation of Cushing’s disease and muscle biopsy evidence
of type II myofiber atrophy. There may be mild serum
CK elevation in some dogs. The pathologic changes have
been described as dystrophic.

Management
Signs can resolve in some dogs over a period of months
when they are treated for their primary disease, but
deficits can persist. Improvement in motor function
appears unlikely but may be inversely related to the
duration of disease prior to therapy. Dietary and rehabilitation treatments should also be instituted, as for
steroid myopathy.

hypothyroid myopathy

cushing’s myopathy

Definition/overview

Definition/overview

A myopathy occurs in dogs associated with spontaneous
or experimentally induced hypothyroidism.

A myopathy has been described in dogs with spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism. A pseudomyotonia is most
often seen.

K22463_C014.indd 626

Etiology
Hypothyroidism.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

Pathophysiology

627

In general, hypothyroidism affects carbohydrate, protein,
and lipid metabolism within muscle. Muscle glycogenolysis is impaired, protein synthesis and degradation are
decreased, causing net protein catabolism, and muscle uptake of triglycerides is reduced. Thyroid hormone
imbalance has been determined to contribute to abnormalities of cellular energy generation in striated muscle
through multiple carnitine-dependent mitochondrial
biochemical pathways, supported in part by the fact
that chronic hypothyroidism in dogs is associated with a
marked reduction of skeletal muscle-free carnitine.

of life. While over 30 muscular dystrophies have been
­identified to date in humans, only a small number have
been characterized in dogs and cats. The muscular dystrophies were originally characterized based on phenotypic features such as pattern of inheritance and the
distribution of muscle involvement. With the advent
of the molecular age, most have been shown to occur
due to mutations of genes that code for proteins in the
dystrophin–­glycoprotein complex that spans the muscle
cell membrane. Dystrophin and its associated glycoproteins connect the contractile apparatus in the muscle to
the sarcolemma, providing mechanical stability.

Clinical presentation

Etiology

Neuromuscular signs, including stiffness, weakness,
reluctance to move, and muscle wasting, may be the first
indication of an underlying endocrine disorder. Typical
clinical signs of hypothyroidism, including lethargy,
weight gain, seborrhea, and alopecia, may or may not be
clinically evident.

Muscular dystrophy in dogs and cats is most commonly
associated with dystrophin deficiency. In some cases, dystrophin is present but is abnormal.

Pathophysiology

Serum CK concentrations may be normal, especially in
the first 6 months of the disease, or significantly elevated.
Aspartate aminotransferase and lactate dehydrogenase
activities can also be elevated. Prominent histopathologic
alterations include variation in muscle fiber size with
type II fiber atrophy and an increased population of type
I fibers, and multifocal nemaline rod inclusions.

Dystrophin links the myofiber cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix and is crucial in stabilization of muscle
fiber membranes during contraction. The dystrophin
gene is located on the X-chromosome; thus, dystrophin
deficiency is an X-linked recessive trait transmitted by a
female carrier. Females may be asymptomatic or expressing carriers, or be homozygous for the disease, produced
from mating carriers and affected males. Homozygous
females have elevated CK levels and comparable histologic lesions to those seen in affected male dogs.

Management

Clinical presentation

The only effective treatment is to restore the patient to a
euthyroid state. Once this is achieved, the prognosis for
recovery can be good and be achieved in a few weeks. It
is reasonable to institute physical therapy to limit disuse
atrophy and joint contractures. There is no evidence that
dietary manipulation improves muscle function in this
disease.

Dystrophin deficiency has been documented in several
breeds of dogs including Golden Retriever, Rottweiler,
German Short-haired Pointer, Irish Terrier, Groenendaeler
Shepherd Dog, Japanese Spitz, Samoyed, Miniature
Schnauzer, Brittany, Rat Terrier, Old English Sheepdog,
Pembroke Welsh Corgi, Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,
Weimaraner, and Labrador Retriever, and in Domestic
Shorthair cats. Clinical signs usually develop in the first
6 months of life and are rapidly progressive, although a
slower disease course has been documented in some dogs.
Affected dogs may demonstrate remarkable phenotypic
variation, with some dogs dying within the first few days
of life and others living well into adulthood.
A deficiency of dystrophin in dogs manifests primarily
in males, causing generally diffuse muscle atrophy and
hypertrophy of certain muscle groups (cranial sartorius,
semimembranosus, semitendinosus, and tongue muscles), and with generalized muscle hypertrophy or atrophy in cats (Figure 14.81). Affected animals can be weak

Diagnosis

NONINFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES:
DYSTROPHIC
muscular dystrophy
Definition/overview
Muscular dystrophies are a heterogeneous group of
inherited, degenerative, mostly noninflammatory disorders characterized by progressive muscle weakness,
muscle atrophy or hypertrophy, gait abnormalities, and
muscle contractures beginning in the first few months

K22463_C014.indd 627

23/04/16 1:21 pm

628

Diseases of specific organ systems

14.81

NONINFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES:
­NONDYSTROPHIC CONGENITAL MYOPATHIES
The nondystrophic congenital myopathies are defined by
distinctive morphologic abnormalities in skeletal muscle
biopsies including centronuclear and myotubular myopathies, the core myopathies, and protein accumulation
myopathies including nemaline rod and myofibrillar
myopathies. The genetic basis for some of these myopathies is known in dogs.

Figure 14.81 Muscular dystrophy in a young cat showing
excessive salivation associated with hypertrophy of its tongue.
(Courtesy M. Schaer and F. Gaschen)

centronuclear myopathy (previously known
as labrador retriever myopathy, type 2 fiber
deficiency, autosomal recessive muscular
dystrophy)

at birth and ineffectual sucklers, necessitating nutritional supplementation; as affected animals age they
become more evidently exercise intolerant. Dogs have a
characteristic plantigrade posture with the paws laterally
rotated and tarsi held close together. While walking they
may advance the hindlimbs simultaneously (‘bunny hop’)
and abduct the forelimbs. Dysphagia, regurgitation, and
dyspnea may occur as a result of hypertrophy of the lingual, pharyngeal, and esophageal musculature and the
diaphragm. Cardiomyopathy may result in heart failure.

Definition/overview

Diagnosis

This is an autosomal recessively inherited myopathy.
A short interspersed repeat element (SINE) exonic insertion in the PTPLA gene leads to multiple splicing defects.

The serum CK concentration is usually markedly elevated (10,000–100,000 IU/l). EMG reveals complex repetitive discharges. A dystrophic phenotype, characterized
early in the course of disease by small group muscle
fiber necrosis and regeneration, and more chronically
by fibrosis and fatty deposition, is typically present on
histopathology of muscle biopsy specimens. An absence
of or decreased amount of dystrophin on immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting of muscle specimens
confirms the diagnosis. Recently, MRI has been used to
characterize the dystrophic muscle. Gene sequencing is
routinely done in humans to identify specific mutations
for the sake of genetic counseling and targeted therapies.
However, mutations have been identified in only a few of
the canine conditions.

Management
There is no specific treatment. Prednisone (0.5 mg/kg
q24h) could have benefit in affected dogs. However, this
has not been substantiated by clinical studies. If steroids
are used, they should be combined with physical therapy.
The prognosis is poor.

K22463_C014.indd 628

Centronuclear myopathies in humans are heterogeneous
forms of inherited muscle disorders that share common
clinical and histologic features. Hallmarks of the disease
include generalized muscle weakness, ptosis, ophthalmoplegia externa, absence of the patellar reflex in Labrador
Retrievers, muscular atrophy predominantly affecting
type 1 myofibers, nuclei centralization, and pale central
zones with variably staining granules.

Etiology

Pathophysiology
Historically, this disorder has been referred to as a polyneuropathy, muscular dystrophy, myotonia, and a hereditary myopathy. The precise etiology was unknown and
there was much debate about whether it represented a
myopathy or a neuropathy, as characteristics of both were
observed. Investigation of chronic pathologic changes in
a group of Labrador Retrievers with a similar phenotype
demonstrated that the muscle pathology became more
obviously myopathic with time and central nuclei were
evident. The term centronuclear myopathy was proposed
for this disease, as the majority of muscle fibers display
centrally placed nuclei, with disorganized sarcoplasmic
architecture over the long term.

Clinical presentation
Yellow, chocolate, and black Labrador Retrievers from
8 weeks to 11 months of age exhibit a stiff ­‘bunny-hopping’
gait with an abnormal ‘low’ head and neck posture

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

and exercise intolerance. Tendon reflexes are absent or
reduced. The signs are exacerbated by cold ambient temperature, exercise, or excitement but tend to stabilize at
1 year of age. Affected dogs often have reduced muscle
mass and a poor conformation, and working strains of
Labrador Retriever are overrepresented.

Diagnosis
Serum CK activity is normal or only mildly elevated.
EMG reveals fibrillation potentials, positive sharp
waves, and complex repetitive discharges. Nerve conduction studies are normal. Pathologic changes within
muscle biopsy specimens are variable and can include
both neuropathic and myopathic abnormalities. There
is usually dramatic variation in myofiber size, with
small and large group atrophy. A few fibers display
centrally placed nuclei and this percentage increases
over the long term. A type II fiber deficiency has been
described. Genetic testing provides the definitive diagnosis and a DNA based test is now available for identification of affected dogs and carriers (http://www.
labradorcnm.com).

Management
Supportive therapy and avoidance of cold are advised
until the condition stabilizes. The disease itself is not
lethal and so the prognosis is fair, but dogs always have
reduced exercise tolerance and will not be able to perform as working dogs. The condition tends to stabilize at
approximately 1 year of age.

inherited myopathy in great danes ­(previously
named central core myopathy, core-like
myopathy)
Definition/overview
A hereditary, noninflammatory myopathy with distinct histologic myopathic features has been described
in young Great Dane dogs, affecting both sexes. While it
was originally described as a ‘central core myopathy’, the
histochemical characteristics differ from this disease in
humans. Now the disease is termed ‘inherited myopathy
of Great Danes’, potentially until an underlying cause has
been identified.

Etiology
An autosomal recessive mode of inheritance is most
likely. New unpublished studies have recently confirmed
that this myopathy now belongs in the centronuclear/
myo­tubular group of myopathies.

K22463_C014.indd 629

629

Clinical presentation
Clinical dysfunction can be seen to affect both males and
females from 6–19 months of age (median age of onset
is 7 months), and consists of progressive muscle wasting,
exercise intolerance, general body tremors, and collapse
exacerbated by excitement or exercise. All affected dogs
have fawn or brindle coat coloration. Affected dogs are
usually stunted when compared to their littermates. The
generalized muscle atrophy is usually mild to moderate
and particularly affects the biceps femoris, quadriceps,
temporalis, gluteal, supraspinatus, and infraspinatus
muscles. The dogs ‘tuck’ their legs under their abdomen
and have an extended tail carriage; when they walk or
run they are short strided with a stiff hindlimb gait,
beginning to ‘bunny hop’ as they get faster. The tremors
are present at rest and get worse with any movement or
excitement. The neurologic examination is unremarkable
but some dogs have been described with reduced reflexes.
Myalgia has not been described in any dogs.

Diagnosis
Serum CK activity has been noted to be normal to
increased (up to 26-fold). EMG reveals fibrillations and
positive sharp waves in all muscles. Diagnosis is easily
made by examination of muscle biopsy specimens that
show well-defined central cytoarchitectural changes
that are highlighted by localization of oxidative enzyme
activity.

Management
There is no known treatment at present and the disease is
usually progressive and fatal, although survival for up to
55 months has been described.

hypokalemic myopathy
Definition/overview
Hypokalemic myopathy is seen in cats and, very rarely, in
dogs, resulting from one of the following: reduced potassium intake; increased potassium entry into the cells;
increased potassium loss from the body; familial disorder
of electrolyte regulation (seen in Burmese kittens).

Etiology
Acute or chronic hypokalemia.

Pathophysiology
Hypokalemia significantly affects muscle membrane
activity and therefore muscle function. The myocyte
becomes increasingly refractory to depolarization in a

23/04/16 1:21 pm

630

Diseases of specific organ systems

hypokalemic environment. Eventually, the muscle cell
membrane suddenly becomes permeable to sodium ions
and membrane hypopolarization occurs, inducing an
acute onset of severe weakness.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of muscle weakness in the cat become evident with any cause of potassium depletion, and include
generalized weakness and ventroflexion of the neck
(Figures 14.82, 14.83). The most severely affected patients
exhibit profound exercise intolerance accompanied by
collapse. The weakness can ultimately result in paralysis
and is progressive until the potassium deficit is corrected.
The neurologic examination is within normal limits.

Diagnosis
The serum potassium level is often 1.5–3.5 mEq/l. Serum
CK is often 500–10,000 IU/l. Chronic kidney disease and
adrenocortical aldosteronomas in cats with urine loss
of potassium should be ruled out with serum biochemistry and urine evaluations, as well as imaging assessments of the structure and function of the kidney and
adrenal glands. The dietary potassium content should
be investigated; diets should be at least 0.6% rich in
potassium. Hyperthyroidism should also be ruled out.
Electrophysiology may be normal or have areas of fibrillations and positive sharp waves. Histologic examination
of muscle biopsies may be normal or show muscle fiber
necrosis with little or no evidence of inflammation.

Management
14.82

Potassium gluconate (2–4 mEq PO q12h) may be used in
all animals. The dosage is adjusted until the serum potassium levels are normal. Adequate diet may be enough if
insufficient potassium was the initiating cause, but potassium supplementation may be needed for life in cats
with renal disease. Spironolactone is helpful for treating
­aldosterone-secreting tumors and adrenocortical hyperplasia involving the zona glomerulosa. Adrenalectomy is
a definitive treatment for the adrenal tumor unless metastasis has occurred. Severely affected cats may be treated
with IV potassium chloride (0.2–0.4 mEq/kg/hour diluted
in IV fluids) with constant cardiac monitoring. Higher
doses might even be required. Prognosis can be good if the
potassium levels can be regulated or supplemented.

myotonia congenita
14.83

Definition/overview
Myotonia is a clinical sign defined as prolonged contraction or delayed relaxation of a muscle after voluntary
movement or after mechanical or electrical stimulation.

Etiology
Myotonia congenita is commonly due to diminished chloride conductance across the muscle membrane.

Pathophysiology

Figures 14.82, 14.83 (14.82) Young kitten with hypokalemic
myopathy showing its muscular weakness. (14.83) The same
kitten 24 hours later after potassium supplementation.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C014.indd 630

As the chloride channel contributes approximately twothirds of the resting membrane conductance, a fall in
chloride channel conductance significantly compromises
the resting membrane potential. During normal muscle
activation–depolarization, potassium ions accumulate in
the sarcoplasmic reticulum and increase the probability

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

of further depolarizations, which is ‘buffered’ in the
­presence of normal high-chloride conductance. Loss of this
conductance tips the balance towards ­potassium-induced
after-depolarization bursts that manifest as myotonia. In
some cases this is due to genetic defects in skeletal muscle
ion channels. Sodium, calcium, and potassium channel
abnormalities have all been documented in people with
similar muscle dysfunctions and likely exist in veterinary medicine.

Clinical presentation
Myotonia is characterized by muscle stiffness without cramping and muscle dimpling after palpation.
Congenital myotonia has been described in the Chow Chow
(suspected autosomal recessive), Miniature Schnauzer
(autosomal recessive), Australian Cattle Dog, Jack Russell
Terrier, and in a series of related domestic k
­ ittens. Dental
and ­craniofacial abnormalities were exhibited in affected
Miniature Schnauzers. Single cases of congenital myotonia have been reported in a Great Dane, a Staffordshire
Terrier, and a Cocker Spaniel. In dogs, clinical signs of
muscle stiffness are evident at the time of first ambulation
and are progressive; however, the signs can improve with
exercise. Myotonia is accompanied by difficulty in rising,
splaying of the limbs, a ‘bunny-hopping’ gait, muscle
hypertrophy, regurgitation, and stridor. Hypertrophied
skeletal muscles are painless on palpation. Similar clinical signs have been documented in cats.

Diagnosis
Routine laboratory evaluations, including serum CK
concentration, are usually normal. Electrophysiologic
­
findings are characterized by waxing and waning myotonic discharges sounding like a ‘revving’ motorcycle.
Muscle biopsy evaluation may reveal muscle hypertrophy or a type I fiber predominance without inflammation. For detection of the mutant allele in affected
and carrier Miniature Schnauzers, a DNA-based test on
whole blood has been developed and is available at the
University of Pennsylvania. A novel mutation of the
CLCN1 gene associated with hereditary myotonia has
also been identified in the Australian Cattle Dog and a
DNA test is now a
­ vailable.

Management
Treatment is directed at decreasing the repetitive activity in the muscle by using antagonists to voltage-gated
sodium channels. These drugs include extended-release
procainamide (40–50 mg/kg PO q8–12h), quinidine,

K22463_C014.indd 631

631

­phenytoin, and mexilitine (8.3 mg/kg PO q8h). The treatment has been documented to improve but not normalize the condition, therefore the prognosis depends on the
severity of the clinical signs in the individual animal.

miscellaneous myopathies and causes
of collapse
exercise-induced collapse in labrador
retrievers
Definition/overview
A syndrome of exercise intolerance and collapse has been
observed in young adult (often 7 months to 2 years old)
Labrador Retrievers of either sex and any color, especially
those used in field trials.

Etiology
A genetic mutation identified in the dynamin 1 gene
(DNM1) is responsible for this disorder in Labrador
Retrievers.

Pathophysiology
Dynamin 1 is expressed almost exclusively in the brain
and spinal cord, where it plays a key role in synaptic vesicle endocytosis at the presynaptic terminal membrane.
The mutant protein results in a temperature dependent
reversible loss of motor function. It appears that this is an
autosomal recessive disease.

Clinical signs
Affected dogs are normal at rest and with normal activity.
They are usually very well muscled, athletic, and excitable. The earliest gait abnormalities seen in exercising
dogs with exercise-induced collapse (EIC) usually include a
‘rocking’ or forced gait, with a wide-based hindlimb stance.
Dogs that can still walk after exercise exhibit a characteristic crouched hindlimb gait with long strides and a basewide posture when turning. Ataxia is usually noted after
5–15 minutes of strenuous activity, often followed by an
episode of collapse, panting, and distress. Patellar reflexes
are lost during this time and this finding may persist
beyond recovery to a normal gait. The dogs usually return
to normal after 10–20 minutes of rest, especially if passive
cooling actions such as fans are used. A small percentage
of dogs have died during the exercise period. Although
dramatic elevations in body temperature after exercise
(>41.5°C) have been reported, normal Labrador Retrievers
demonstrate similar such elevations without collapse.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

632

Diseases of specific organ systems

Affected dogs are significantly more tachycardic and have
more severe respiratory alkalosis after exercise compared
with normal dogs. Although a few dogs with EIC have
been documented with mild elevations in serum CK levels after exercise, they are not compatible with dystrophic
or myonecrotic muscle. Muscle biopsy characteristics and
sequential lactate and pyruvate concentrations are normal when evaluated. A similar syndrome has been seen in
working Border Collies, Golden Retrievers, and Australian
Shepherd Dogs, although it is likely that a different genetic
mutation is responsible.

Diagnosis
Apart from severe alkalosis on arterial blood gas analysis, all clinicopathologic (including lactate:pyruvate
ratios), electrophysiologic, and histopathologic tests
are normal. A genetic test is now available for identi­
fication of affected and carrier dogs of the Labrador
Retriever, Chesapeake Bay Retriever, and Curly Coated
Retriever breeds http://www.vdl.umn.edu/services-andfees/canine-neuromuscular/index.htm.

Management
The condition is not progressive and so a normal life span
should be expected if the dogs are not heavily exercised.
Exercise restriction is the only advice given at this time
regarding treatment, especially when ambient temperatures are high. Hunting dogs may be less affected in cold
weather. Genetic testing can be used to guide breeding
programs.

fibrotic myopathy
Definition/overview
This acquired, usually nonpainful disorder associated
with a fibrous band within a muscle has been reported
sporadically in dogs affecting specific muscle groups
including the muscles of the medial thigh (gracilis, semimembranosus, or semitendinosus), sartorius, infraspinatus, and iliopsoas. It is most commonly seen in German
Shepherd Dogs, usually male, with an age range from
8 months to 9 years. Similar disorders have been reported
in the Dobermann, Rottweiler, St. Bernard, Boxer, and Old
English Sheepdog. Fibrotic myopathy of the semitendinosus has been reported in a cat.

Etiology
Active dogs seem to be susceptible to this disorder and
recent studies in dogs suggest that fibrotic myopathy
may be related to muscle injury from excessive activity,
including jumping and sprinting.

K22463_C014.indd 632

Pathophysiology
Fibrotic myopathy has been called gracilis or semitendinosus myopathy, although any of the hamstring muscles
can be affected, and a similar disease has been described
affecting the infraspinatus, sartorius, and iliopsoas muscles. A fibrous band can be palpated within the affected
muscle belly and can extend the length of the muscle.
It is proposed that muscle strain causes inflammation,
edema, and localized hemorrhage, which leads to fibrosis. Increased angulation (flexion) at the stifle in normal German Shepherd Dogs may predispose these dogs
to increased hamstring stress during physical activity,
explaining their overrepresentation.

Clinical presentation
This may be a unilateral or bilateral disease and signs
depend on the muscle group involved. While onset in
some dogs is acute, the gait deficit appears to be insidious
in most dogs and is best seen when dogs are ‘trotting’.

●● Gracilis myopathy. In dogs with gracilis and/
or semimembranosus or semitendinosus muscle
involvement, the hindlimb gait is characterized by a
shortened stride with a rapid medial rotation of the
paw, external rotation of the hock, and internal rotation of the stifle during the mid-to-late swing phase
of the stride, resulting in the paw being slapped to the
ground prematurely. The gait anomaly results from
restricted abduction of the coxofemoral joint and
reduced extension of the stifle and hock.
●● Iliopsoas fibrotic myopathy. This has been associated with chronic progressive lameness, flexion contracture of the coxofemoral joints, severe pain, and
decreased femoral reflexes.
●● Infraspinatus myopathy. Fibrotic contracture of
the infraspinatus muscle, a rare musculotendineous disorder mainly affecting hunting dogs, begins
as an acute onset of a painful nonweight-bearing
lameness. Following this onset, the initial pain and
lameness improve over a period of 1–4 weeks, after
which a characteristic circumducted gait abnormality develops in the forelimb accompanied by elbow
adduction with external rotation of the distal part of
both forelimbs.

Diagnosis
The gait is characteristic of the disease and neurologic
examination is usually normal. Tight fibrous cords
are palpable in affected muscles. Atrophy or swelling
may be associated with this disease when affecting the
infraspinatus muscles. Serum CK levels may be normal

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

or moderately elevated in some animals. Absence of
­myoelectrical activity in the band during EMG evaluation
is consistent with total replacement of muscle fibers by
dense connective tissue. Ultrasonography, CT, and MRI
can all be useful for diagnosing muscle fibrosis in the specific muscles affected by this disease.

Management
Prognosis is guarded to poor, since the condition in
dogs tends to recur within several months following
surgical resection of the fibrous band, or transection,
partial excision, or complete resection of the affected
muscle. However, tenectomy has been described to
improve gait and provide pain relief associated with
iliopsoas muscle contracture, as it has with bilateral
infraspinatus contractures. Nonsurgical treatment (e.g.
corticosteroids, NSAIDs, acupuncture) is usually ineffective. Nonsurgical rehabilitation, including therapeutic
ultrasound and cross-fiber friction massage, resulted
in mild improvement in several dogs (slight increase
in range of motion of the stifle and less crossing-over
of hindlimbs). However, gracilis and semitendinosus
fibrosis does not appear to be painful and simply causes
a gait deficit: dogs can live with these diseases without
a problem.

exertional rhabdomyolysis, malignant
hyperthermia, and rhabdomyolysis
Definition/overview
Rhabdomyolysis is a clinical syndrome consisting of
acute muscle necrosis with swollen painful muscles causing weakness and collapse. With the exception of racing
Greyhounds and sled dogs, exertional rhabdomyolysis (ER) is rare. Malignant hyperthermia (MH) has been
reported in various breeds of immature and mature
dogs: St. Bernards, Border Collies, Labrador Retrievers,
Pointers, Spaniels, Greyhounds, and animals crossbred
with Dobermanns.

Etiology
MH is a hereditary disorder of skeletal muscle, with collapsing episodes triggered by exposure to halothane,
depolarizing muscle relaxants, and occasionally stress
or exercise. Rhabdomyolysis may also occur sporadically
in dogs as a complication of prolonged convulsive seizures (and extreme muscle exertion), infections including babesiosis and neosporosis, heat stroke, and MH.
Rhabdomyolysis has also been reported following various intoxications and envenomations, and as an idiopathic disorder in dogs.

K22463_C014.indd 633

633

Pathophysiology
In racing Greyhounds exhibiting ER, severe lactic acidosis leading to muscle cell swelling, local ischemia, muscle cell necrosis, and myoglobinuria (Figure 14.84) with
nephropathy has been proposed as a likely sequence of
events in the pathogenesis. The final common pathophysiologic mechanism resulting from direct injury to the
sarcolemma or failure of energy supply to the muscle is
an uncontrolled rise in free intracellular calcium concentration and activation of calcium-dependent proteases.
These abnormalities result in destruction of myofibrils
and lysosomal digestion of muscle fiber contents (myonecrosis). In MH, the underlying defect in calcium (Ca)
homeostasis occurs at the level of the skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum, where there is hypersensitive and
heightened ligand-gating of the Ca-release channel. Most
variants of MH are known to be caused by a mutation in
the gene on chromosome 1 encoding the skeletal muscle
calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor 1: RYR1).

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of ER may occur during or within 24–48
hours of a race or trial and are characterized by extreme
distress, hyperpnea, and generalized muscle pain, especially over the back and hindquarters, which may appear
swollen and firm. Limbs may be rigidly tonic and affected
dogs may have a ‘hunchback’ appearance and refuse to
walk. Myoglobinuria and death within 48 hours are common in severe, acute cases. Typical manifestations of collapse associated with MH include a rapidly progressive
elevation in body temperature, tachycardia, hypercarbia,
and rhabdomyolysis.

Diagnosis
Clinical signs associated with an acute episode of exertion
should prompt suspicion. Serum CK may be markedly elevated. Urinalysis should be performed to rule out subsequent myoglobinuria (Figure 14.84). EMG investigation
will be normal in acute muscle disease. Muscle biopsy will
confirm rhabdomyolysis but, as time is of the essence for
the treatment of this disease, it is rarely advised.

Management
Treatment for rhabdomyolysis is mainly supportive,
with intensive fluid therapy being necessary to maintain normal renal function. The systemic complications
of rhabdomyolysis should be identified and individually addressed. Multimodal drug therapy including dantrolene, analgesics, antibiotics, and mannitol has been
described with a beneficial effect. Frequent blood gas
analyses, biochemistry, and urine analyses are advised,

23/04/16 1:21 pm

634

Diseases of specific organ systems

14.84

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of an inflammatory myopathy necessitates
muscle biopsy. Elevations of serum CK and abnormal
needle EMG can be nonspecific findings. Definitive etiologic diagnosis may be difficult as it relies on the identification of organisms within the tissues, specifically with
molecular or immunohistochemical methods; however,
Toxoplasma and Neospora spp. are often seen within the
muscle. The interpretation of serologic titers is particularly difficult in the acute stages of disease, because a single positive result only implies exposure to the disease,
rather than clinical infection.

Figure 14.84 A urine sample showing myoglobinuria.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

to monitor systemic acid–base status as well as kidney
function. The prognosis is guarded.
It is essential to remove triggering agents in the treatment of MH. This needs to be combined with symptomatic
treatment. Stomach lavage with iced water, body surface
cooling, and IV administration of cold isotonic saline
solution may be beneficial. Dantrolene can prevent a MH
crisis or reverse anesthetic-induced MH if given early
enough (3–5 mg/kg IV). As for rhabdomyolysis, the prognosis is guarded.

INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES: INFECTIOUS
Definition/overview
Infection can occasionally cause diffuse muscle and/or
nerve disease and may be part of a systemic disease.

Etiology
Inflammatory myopathies have been associated with protozoal, viral, rickettsial, and, rarely, bacterial infections.

Pathophysiology
Infections causing myopathies in dogs and cats are
usually multisystemic. Protozoal and viral infections
often become clinical in young animals in situations
of immune compromise. Older animals may have concurrent infections or neoplastic diseases affecting local
immunocompetence.

Clinical presentation
Signs seen in these patients are not specific but represent
diffuse muscle disease; they include marked weight loss,
weakness, exercise intolerance, generalized muscle atrophy, muscle pain (myalgia) and, in the late stages of disease, contractures and recumbency.

K22463_C014.indd 634

Management
The prognosis for most infectious inflammatory myopathies is guarded, but partial function may remain if
treatment is initiated early in the course of the disease.
Clindamycin treatment is recommended for protozoal
myositis and this has been reported to be successful but
may require months of administration. If CNS infection
is suspected, additional antimicrobials should be considered such as the trimethoprim–sulfa drugs. If treatment is not initiated until the disease has reached a state
of recumbency, it is unlikely that the patient will walk
again. Intense physiotherapy may be needed in addition
to specific antibiotics, especially in young patients that
are continuing to grow in the face of severe muscle contractures caused by the infections.

INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES:
IMMUNE-MEDIATED
idiopathic polymyositis
Definition/overview
Idiopathic polymyositis is a generalized inflammatory
myopathy affecting dogs and, less commonly, cats, not
associated with any other systemic connective tissue disease or infectious cause.

Etiology
Immune-mediated dysfunction.

Pathophysiology
Tissue inflammation arises due to immune-mediated
damage by CD8+ T lymphocytes. Several genes involved
with innate and adaptive immunity are upregulated in
this disease, as are those involved in proinflammatory and
anti-inflammatory pathways. Circulating ­autoantibodies
against an unidentified sarcolemmal antigen supporting
a humoral immune component have been reported in

23/04/16 1:21 pm

Disorders of the nervous system and muscle

Newfoundlands and Boxers. Autoantibodies to a 42-kDa
molecule in striated muscle have been documented in
Pembroke Welsh Corgis.

Clinical presentation
Progressive exercise intolerance with acute exacerbation
of weakness may occur, but the disease may initially be
episodic; marked weight loss is often reported by the
owner. A stiff, uncomfortable gait in all limbs is often
accompanied by an arched thoracolumbar spine (kyphosis) and a ventroflexed neck. Commonly, multiple skeletal muscles are affected, but it can manifest as a focal
disease affecting pharyngeal, laryngeal, esophageal, or,
infrequently, tongue muscle groups, causing dysphagia,
dysphonia, and stridor, or regurgitation. Myalgia may
be present but this is not a consistent finding. Pyrexia
may be a feature of the disease or a consequence of
aspiration pneumonia. Any age and breed of dog and
cat may be affected. However, breed-specific variants of
polymyositis affect Newfoundlands, Boxers, Pembroke
Welsh Corgis, and, recently, Hungarian Vizslas. The disease affecting Vizslas is marked by pharyngeal dysphagia, megaesophagus, and masticatory muscle atrophy,
although exercise intolerance has also been described.
Dysphagia and megaesophagus are more commonly seen
in Newfoundlands with inflammatory myopathy when
compared with other dogs. Corgis present with severe
tongue atrophy, facial muscular atrophy, and occasional
gait abnormalities.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on identification of at least three of the
following, including a confirmatory muscle biopsy:

●● Appropriate clinical signs.
●● Elevation of serum CK concentration (at least 5–10
times the upper reference range) (CK can be low in
end-stage disease). CK is not always elevated during

K22463_C014.indd 635

635

active muscle disease; this seems to depend on distribution of cellular infiltrates and degree of muscle
damage.
●● Compatible electrophysiologic findings.
●● Negative infectious disease titers.
●● Inflammatory muscle biopsy (critical for the diagnosis); demonstration of mononuclear cell infiltration
into muscle and invasion of cells into apparently
non-necrotic fibers.

Management
Early and aggressive institution of immunosuppressive therapy is essential for a good clinical outcome. The
prognosis can be good unless there is concurrent mega­
esophagus or pharyngeal dysfunction, or if therapy is
not initiated until after there has been severe myofiber
loss or fibrosis. Robust muscle regeneration has been
documented in the face of significant inflammation and
fibrosis, suggesting that muscle can survive if treatment
can be initiated prior to regenerative capacity of the
muscle being exhausted. Long-term treatment is usually
required. The serum CK concentration should be monitored and immunosuppressive therapy continued until
the CK returns to the reference range and clinical signs
have resolved.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
De Lahunta A, Glass E, Kent M (2015) Veterinary Neuroanatomy
and Clinical Neurology, 4th edn. Elsevier, St. Louis.
De Risio L, Platt SR (2014) Canine and Feline Epilepsy: Diagnosis
and Management. CABI Publishing, Wallingford.
Lorenz MD, Coates J, Kent M (2010) Handbook of Neurology, 5th
edn. Elsevier, St. Louis.
Platt SR, Garosi L (2012) Small Animal Neurological Emergencies.
Manson Publishing, London.
Platt SR, Olby N (2012) BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline
Neurology, 4th edn. British Small Animal Veterinary
Association, Gloucester.

23/04/16 1:21 pm

This page intentionally left blank

637

Chapter 15
Bone and joint disorders
Steven M. Fox

These are exciting times in veterinary medicine, particularly for those with an interest in musculoskeletal disorders. As a result of an ever expanding knowledge base, pets
are living longer and the human–animal bond has never
been stronger. Senior dogs are becoming recognized as a
group with special needs and pain management is gaining recognition as a foundation of our practice ethics. The
discovery of cyclo-oxygenase-1 and cyclo-oxygenase-2 has
revived interest in identifying and designing nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), which have found
increasing use in the treatment of pain and inflammation.
Nutritional management, exercise, and physical therapy,
long ignored in veterinary medicine, are now being recognized as rational treatment adjuncts. Disease processes
are being recognized as more complex than previously
appreciated, and it follows that treatment must embrace
similar complexity. The quest for greater understanding
must always be a driving force for the practitioner.

History
Making a clinical diagnosis is often assisted by noting the
correlation of clinical signs to a time course (Figure 15.1).
This can only be done by recording an accurate history.
Whereas traumatic injuries present with an acute severity that rapidly diminishes, autoimmune diseases are
often episodic in clinical presentation and neoplasia generally presents with vague signs that become progressively worse with time.

Examination
Dogs and cats with skeletal diseases most often present
with lameness, swelling, or a combination of the two.
After recording a thorough history and conducting a
comprehensive physical examination, radiography is
often the most informative diagnostic aid. To determine
the most probable cause of the problem, the clinician
must identify the pathophysiologic disease mechanisms
involved that are associated with the clinical presentation and, thereafter, derive a diagnosis. Trying to determine a cause of the problem without identifying the

K22463_C015.indd 637

pathophysiologic disease mechanisms involved leads to
an overdependence on diagnosis by previous experience,
thereby restricting the capacity to diagnose disease processes never personally encountered.
The Problem Oriented Medical Record is designed for
a logical approach to problem solving. Additionally, to
avoid overlooking possible differential diagnoses, many
find it helpful to screen for disease processes using the
DAMNIT acronym of pathophysiology:

●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

Degenerative disorders.
Anomalies, autoimmunity.
Metabolic disorders.
Neoplasia, nutritional disorders.
Inflammation (infectious or noninfectious), immune
disorders, iatrogenic disorders, idiopathic.
●● Toxicity (endogenous or exogenous), trauma ­(internal
or external).
The following conditions should be considered under the
heading of musculoskeletal disorders:

●● Degenerative disorders. Degenerative joint disease
(DJD), canine hip dysplasia, intervertebral disk disease, cauda equina syndrome.
15.1

Diseases of bones and joints
Trauma

Autoimmune
Severity of clinical signs

INTRODUCTION

Neoplasia

Time lapse

Figure 15.1 The correlation between clinical signs and a time
course.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

638

Diseases of specific organ systems

●● Anomalies. Agenesis, luxation, ectrodactyly, osteo-

●●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

●●
●●

chondrodysplasia, elbow dysplasia (ununited anconeal process, fragmented coronoid process), growth
arrests, growth plate disorders, retained cartilage
core.
Autoimmunity.
Metabolic disorders. Hyperparathyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism.
Neoplasia. Osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, synovial cell sarcoma.
Nutritional disorders. Nutritional hyperthyroidism,
hypervitaminosis A, hypovitaminosis D.
Inflammation.
Osteomyelitis,
diskospondylitis,
arthritis.
Immune disorders. Systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE).
Iatrogenic disorders. Synostosis.
Idiopathic. Avascular necrosis of the femoral head
(Legg–Calvé–Perthes disease), hypertrophic osteopathy, bone cyst, multiple cartilaginous exostoses,
osteochondrosis, panosteitis, craniomandibular osteopathy, hypertrophic osteodystrophy.
Toxicity. Lead poisoning.
Trauma. Fracture, luxation, cruciate ligament rupture.

Many skeletal diseases are predisposed to specific areas
of long bones, which makes disease rule outs logical by
region of bone affected (Figure 15.2). Bone diseases that
affect the epiphysis include infectious arthritis (with
extension to subchondral bone), joint tumors (fibrosarcoma, synovial sarcoma [with extension to adjacent bone]),
osteochondrosis (proximal humerus, medial humeral condyle, and lateral femoral condyle), osteoarthrosis
(with sub­
chondral bone sclerosis and/or epiphyseal
Epiphysis:
Fracture
Osteomyelitis
(hematogenous)
Joint diseases

‘cysts’), primary bone tumors (with extension to the
epiphysis), and e­ rosive polyarthritis (rheumatoid [with
periarticular and subchondral bone lysis]). Alterations of
the physis may be seen with traumatic injury or fracture,
hematogenous dissemination of infection, and nutritional or endocrine disorders. Diseases that may affect
the metaphysis include primary bone tumors (osteogenic
sarcoma, chondrosarcoma, and fibrosarcoma), primary
hemangiosarcoma of bone, disseminated osteomyelitis,
metastatic tumors, and hypertrophic osteodystrophy.
Lesions of the diaphysis can result from canine panosteitis, metastatic tumors, bone infarction, disseminated
osteomyelitis, primary hemangiosarcoma of bone, and
hypertrophic osteopathy (hypertrophic pulmonary
osteoarthropathy). It must be appreciated that some skeletal diseases are characterized by unpredictable anatomic location and variable distribution.

DEGENERATIVE DISORDERS
DEGENERATIVE JOINT DISEASE
Definition/overview
DJD is a total joint disease, with joint cartilage degeneration. Surface fibrillation and fissures ultimately result
from an initial increase in cartilage swelling followed by
dehydration and reduction in concentration of matrix
proteoglycan. This leads to deformation under loading,
with less elastic return and, consequently, more contact
pressure on subchondral bone (Figure 15.3).

Pathophysiology
Autoimmunity and the phagocytosis of immune complexes, leading to the release of substances deleterious
Physis:
Fracture
Nutritional/endocrine
disorders

15.2

Diaphysis:
Fracture
Panosteitis
Tumor (secondary)
Primary hemangiosarcoma
Hypertrophic osteopathy
Disseminated osteomyelitis
Infarct
Enostosis

Metaphysis:
Fracture
Tumor (primary and secondary)
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy
Disseminated osteomyelitis
Osteochondromatosis
Retained cartilage core
Lead poisoning
Bone cysts
nutritional or endocrine disoders. Diseases tumors, bone infraction, disseminated
osteomyelitis, primary

Figure 15.2 Bone diseases affecting long bones.

K22463_C015.indd 638

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

to the affected joint, play an important role in the pathogenesis of DJD, although the exact role of specific immune
responses is not known.

Clinical presentation
Affected animals usually present with lameness or gait
change. Once the affected joints are identified and examined, radiographs are taken to support the diagnosis.

639

Diagnosis
Characteristic radiographic features of DJD include subchondral bony sclerosis, subchondral cyst formation,
joint space narrowing, and intra-articular or periarticular osteophyte formation. Arthroscopy can be both diagnostic and a treatment option. Arthroscopically observed
morphologic changes gives the clinician an appreciation
for early treatment of these disorders.

15.3

15.5
NSAID

Multimodal
management of
canine osteoarthritis
(pharmacologic)

Adjunct

Figure 15.3 Eburnation of the femoral head resulting from
DJD. Chondromalacia attributed to a decrease in sulfated
mucopolysaccharide content is the earliest sign of degeneration,
followed by fibrillation–exposure of the collagen framework
through the loss of ground substance. Fibrillation progresses
to eburnation as subchondral bone becomes sclerotic from
mechanical pressure and/or the effect of the synovial fluid.

Physical
rehabilitation

15.4
Physical
rehabilitation

Adjunct

NSAID

Multimodal
management of
canine osteoarthritis

EPA-rich
diet

Multimodal
management of
canine osteoarthritis
(nonpharmacologic)

Weight
control and
exercise

Chondroprotectant

Figure 15.4 The multimodal management of canine
osteoarthritis integrates six different elements: NSAIDs; weight
control and exercise; a chondroprotectant; an eicosapentaenoic
acid-rich diet; an adjunct; and physical rehabilation. (From Fox
SM (2013) Pain Management in Small Animal Medicine. CRC Press,
Boca Raton).

K22463_C015.indd 639

Chrondoprotectant

a

Weight
control and
exercise

EPA-rich
diet

b
Figures 15.5a, b (15.5a) The pharmacologic (medical)
management of osteoarthritis is achieved with a NSAID,
a chondroprotectant, and analgesic adjuncts. (15.5b) The
nonpharmaceutical management of osteoarthritis comprises
weight control/exercise, an eicosapentaenoic acid-rich diet, and
physical rehabilitation. (From Fox SM (2013) Pain Management in
Small Animal Medicine. CRC Press, Boca Raton)

25/04/16 11:58 pm

640

Diseases of specific organ systems

115

Z peak (as percent baseline)

>90
δ
110

15.6

approximate change seen with weight loss
δ approximate change seen with PRP
approximate change seen with high-EPA diets

Control

∫∫ approximate change seen with Dasequin

Etodolac
Carprofen

105

Aspirin

∫∫

Acetaminophen
Tepoxalin
100

Meloxicam
Firocoxib

95

Deracoxib
0

7

14

Time (Days)

n=8

Figure 15.6 Relative efficacy of several contemporary NSAIDs used in veterinary medicine to treat osteoarthritis as assessed by force
plate gait analysis (FPGA). Every dog in this study responded to a NSAID, but not every dog responded to each NSAID. Comparative
responses from different treatment modalities (different studies) are further superimposed on this NSAID response graphic. All the
studies used FPGA for assessment.
Millis DL (2006) Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, disease-modifying drugs, and osteoarthritis. A multimodal approach to
treating osteoarthritis. Symposium Proceedings, Western Veterinary Conference. (Comparing relative efficacy of various NSAIDs by force
plate gait analysis in cruciate deficient dogs.)
⨳ Clinician’s Update™ (2005) Canine osteoarthritis: overview, therapies, & nutrition. Supplement to NAVC Clinician’s Brief ®. April 2005.
d Fahle MA, Ortolano GA, Guercia V et al. (2013) A randomized controlled trial of the efficacy of autologous platelet therapy for the
treatment of osteoarthritis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 243(9):1291–1297.
* Millis DL (2005) Effects of feeding omega-3 fatty acids on force plate gait analysis in dogs with osteoarthritis: 3-month feeding
study, 2003. Hill’s Clinical Evidence Report. Technical Information Services.
∬ Millis DL (2010) Dasuquin’s efficacy may be similar to that of NSAIDs in dogs. Joint Health: a roundtable discussion. Supplement.
Vet Med 105(11):10.

Management
Treatment goals are to alleviate discomfort, retard
the development of further deterioration, and restore
affected joints to as near normal as possible. Optimal
­management is with implementation of a multimodal regimen (Figure 15.4), which is best approached through the
six points of two overlapping triangles, one representing
nonmedical treatment and the other medical treatment
(Figures 15.5a, b, 15.6). Surgical intervention may be appropriate, especially in correcting conditions of instability.
Two recent additions to the adjunct modality in consideration for management of canine DJD are implementation of a piprant class drug and radiosynoviorthesis.
In 2013 the World Health Organization defined a newly
recognized class of drug that acts as a prostaglandin
receptor antagonist. The prototypic drug grapriprant is
an analgesic, anti-inflammatory agent that acts as an EP4
prostaglandin receptor antagonist. Radiosynoviorthesis
is an intra-articular radionuclide therapy, for which
Sn-117m is showing promise for its therapeutic effects in
animal models of inflammatory arthritis.

K22463_C015.indd 640

HIP DYSPLASIA
Definition/overview
Hip dysplasia, a developmental disorder characterized
by hip laxity, pain, and development of osteoarthritis, is
more common in large breeds of dogs. Nongenetic risk
factors include nutrition, growth rate, body size, exercise,
and muscle mass.

Etiology
Although the cause of hip dysplasia is unknown, it has a
hereditary basis. It is considered to be a polygenic trait,
with expression determined by genetic and environmental factors.

Pathophysiology
At birth the hip is normal. With development, congruity
of the femoral head and the acetabulum is lost, resulting in increased amounts of synovial fluid and hypertrophy of the round ligament of the head of the femur.
Articular cartilage deteriorates, synovitis ensues, and the

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

15.7

641

15.8
Ilium
Femoral head ligament
Head of femur (flattened)

1

2

Greater
trochanter

Pubis
Obturator
foramen

Femur

3

Ischium

Acetabulum

15.9

Figure 15.7 Moderate hip dysplasia. Less than 40% dorsal rim
acetabular cover of the femoral head and secondary changes:
1, sclerosis of the cranial acetabular margin; 2, osteophyte
build up at femoral neck capsule attachment (Morgan’s line or
caudolateral curvilinear osteophyte); and 3, caudal acetabular
rim osteophyte deposition.

joint capsule thickens. With further progression of joint
incongruity, bone changes occur and osteophytes form
surrounding the joint (Figure 15.7). Discomfort in the
early stages of the disease is associated with stretching or
tearing of fibers in the joint capsule and the round ligament, while that in advanced disease is from osteoarthritis (Figures 15.8, 15.9).

Clinical presentation
Signs of decreased activity and various degrees of joint
discomfort are seen at two stages of the afflicted dog’s
life; between 4 and 12 months of age, and over 5 years.
Affected dogs will often bunny hop (run with both hindlimbs moving together), prefer to sit rather than stand,
demonstrate decreased motility and range of motion,

K22463_C015.indd 641

Figures 15.8, 15.9 (15.8) Illustration of hip dysplasia showing
femoral head luxation, shallow acetabulum, and femoral head
conformation change. (15.9) Poor acetabular cover to the
femoral head (arrows).

posture abnormally to toilet, and may show changes in
eating trends and behavior.

Differential diagnosis
Degenerative myelopathy, lumbosacral disease, stifle
instability, fracture, luxation.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

642

Diseases of specific organ systems

15.10

For the immature animal, pectineal myectomy, pubic
symphysiodesis, pelvic osteotomy, and femoral osteotomy
are procedures frequently performed, while femoral head
and neck excision and total hip replacement are most often
performed in the mature animal. With the exception of pectineal myectomy and femoral head and neck excision, these
surgeries require both special equipment and training.

INTERVERTEBRAL DISK DISEASE
15.11

(See also Chapter 14: Disorders of the nervous system and
muscle.)

Definition/overview
Intervertebral disk degeneration and protrusion or extrusion of disk material into the vertebral canal cause the
most common neurologic syndrome in dogs. The disease
is particularly common in chondrodystrophoid breeds,
which present with spinal-associated pain, ataxia, paresis, and even paralysis or myelomalacia.

Etiology

Diagnosis is made by physical (Figures 15.10, 15.11) and
radiographic examination. Comparing a lame limb with
the contralateral limb and observing the dog ambulate
at different gaits and on different surfaces, as well as on
steps, can be helpful during the physical examination.

The cause of intervertebral disk degeneration is unknown.
With aging, the center of the intervertebral disks, the
nucleus pulposus, loses the stainability by safranin-O
stain, suggesting a reduced amount of proteoglycans. The
outer layer of the intervertebral disk, the annulus fibrosus,
shows cracks or fissures, and the nucleus protrudes peripherally through these fissures. Changes progress with aging
and result in a mass of protruded nucleus in the spinal
canal causing spinal cord compression. With advanced
aging, all intervertebral disk tissues are forced out of the
intervertebral disk space and bone-to-bone contact of the
vertebral endplates causes irregular margins. At the same
time, spondylosis deformans (new bone formation around
the intervertebral disks) progresses. The protruded mass
in the spinal canal may eventually become calcified or
even ossified. Although articular cartilage is made of hyaline cartilage and intervertebral disks are composed of
fibrocartilage, both are cartilaginous tissues and similar
cellular and structural changes are seen with aging.

Management

Pathophysiology

Available treatments (conservative or surgical) vary
widely depending on the age of the animal, the pathologic
condition of the joint, the expectation of function, the surgical skill of the clinician, and the financial resources of
the owner. Conservative management consists of formulated exercise, weight loss, EPA-rich diets, and judicious
use of analgesics and NSAIDs. Nutraceuticals have gained
popularity as adjunct therapy for DJD; however, their evidence base remains indecisive.

Hansen type I disk lesions with early chondroid degeneration of the disk, disk mineralization, and acute onset are
typical for ages 3–6 years (Figure 15.12). Dachshunds are
most commonly affected, although Shih Tzus, Pekingese,
Lhaso Apsos, Welsh Corgis, and Beagles are at significant
risk. Hansen type II disk lesions are more typical in nonchondrodystrophoid dogs, often between 8 and 10 years old
(Figure 15.13). Type II lesions are more slow and insidious,
with fibroid degeneration and little mineralization.

Figures 15.10, 15.11 Physical examination for the Ortolani
sign. In 15.10, the coxofemoral joint is subluxated by driving
the femoral shaft dorsal to the long axis of the spine. In 15.11,
with the coxofemoral joint subluxated, the femur is abducted
until the femoral head ‘clunks’ back into the acetabulum. The
palpable (and often audible) clunk is considered a positive
Ortalani sign. (Adapted from Fox SM (1987) A symposium on hip
dysplasia. Veterinary Medicine 82(7):683–716.)

Diagnosis

K22463_C015.indd 642

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

643

15.14

15.12

White matter of spinal cord
Gray matter of spinal cord
Dura mater (necrotic)
Nucleus pulposus
Annulus of vertebral disk
Ilium
Obturator foramen

15.15

15.13

Spinal cord compression
Dura mater (necrotic)
Nucleus pulposus
Annulus of vertebral disk
Ilium

Obturator foramen

Figures 15.12, 15.13 Intervertebral disk herniation: type I
(15.12) and type II (15.13).

Clinical presentation
Protrusions or extrusions can occur laterally, dorsally, or
ventrally. Lateral protrusions and extrusions may occasionally cause clinical signs, but in most cases dorsal
disk protrusions are clinically significant, manifesting as
meningeal irritation and compression of the nerve root
or spinal cord. Back pain (68%), nonambulatory paraparesis (77%), and upper motor neuron signs (90%) prevail.
The effects of lower motor neuron disease are a flaccid
urinary bladder, which is easily expressed, and overflow
incontinence.

Figures 15.14, 15.15 Intervertebral disk disease (C6/7) (arrow)
in a female Dobermann (15.14, plain film; 15.15, myelogram).
Protrusion or extrusion of disk material is suggested
radiographically by (1) narrowing of the intervertebral disk
space; (2) narrowing of the space between the paired cranial
and caudal articular facets; (3) decreased size or a change
in shape of the neural foramen; (4) increased density in the
area of the neural foramen; and (5) presence of calcified disk
material within the spinal canal. Note the dorsal ‘tipping’ of the
C7 leading edge in the plain film.
15.16
Caudal
articular
process

Spinous
process
(cut)

Vertebral
ligament Spinal cord
(inflamed) (compressed)

Differential diagnosis
Diskospondylitis, fracture, vertebral spondylosis, neoplasia, fibrocartilaginous embolism.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made from patient data, history, and physical examination. Localization of the lesion(s) is made
by neurologic examination and radiographic studies.
Survey radiographic findings include narrowing, wedging, or collapse of the intervertebral disk space and articular facets, narrowing of the intervertebral foramen, and
calcified material within the vertebral canal (Figures
15.14–15.16). Myelography studies are almost always

K22463_C015.indd 643

Transverse process

Figure 15.16 Illustration of the cervical vertebrae as associated
with wobbler disease.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

644

Diseases of specific organ systems

Osteophytes on caudal
articular process

required, particularly in assessing for multiple lesion
sites. MRI has been reported to be the best method for
early recognition of disk degeneration in dogs, and CT
is ­becoming more widely used with increased accessibility.

Spinous process
of L7 (cut)

Iliac
crest

Ligamentum flavum
hypertrophy

Management
Considerable
controversy
surrounds
treatment.
­Conservative therapy relies on forced rest to resolve the
inflammation and stabilize the ruptured disk by fibrosis.
Conservative management consists of restricted exercise,
weight loss, and judicious use of analgesics and NSAIDs.
The judicious use of anti-inflammatory drugs and muscle relaxants is secondary to cage rest in this treatment
choice. Worsening of clinical signs due to overactivity is
common in dogs treated with medication alone.
Surgical management is subdivided into prophylactic
and therapeutic procedures. While prophylaxis involves
surgical removal of the nuclear material from the intact
disk, treatment relies on removal of the herniated
nuclear material from the vertebral canal or intervertebral foramen.

CAUDA EQUINA SYNDROME
Definition/overview
A number of pathologic disorders (acute disk extrusions at
the L6/L7 and L7/S1 level, spondylosis and acquired stenosis of L7/S1, and the congenital stenotic canal syndrome of
L6/L7 and L7/S1) are collectively referred to as the cauda
equina syndrome. This syndrome encompasses all possible
causes of compression, destruction, displacement, inflammation, or vascular compromise of the nerve roots, often
captured in various names such as lumbosacral spondylopathy, lumbosacral stenosis, lumbosacral malformation/
malarticulation, degenerative lumbosacral stenosis, lumbosacral disease, and lumbosacral spondylolisthesis.

Etiology
Suggested causes include conformation, physical activity,
vertebral malformation, and genetic predisposition. The
most common cause is degenerative lumbosacral stenosis (Figure 15.17), where soft tissue and bony changes
impinge on the nerve roots or vasculature of the cauda
equina.

Pathophysiology
The lumbosacral joint is a site of considerable force transfer, with flexion being the main movement. Abnormal
lumbosacral motion due to degenerative changes leads to
compensatory skeletal changes such as lumbosacral endplate sclerosis, osteophytes of articular facets, hypertrophy of the interarcuate ligament and articular facet joint

K22463_C015.indd 644

Body of L7 (cut)

15.17

Cauda equina
(compressed)

Intervertebral disk
herniation

Figure 15.17 Illustration of degenerative lumbosacral stenosis.

capsule, and bulging of the dorsal annulus. The aftermath
is compression of the terminal spinal cord and adjacent
nerve roots within the vertebral canal.

Clinical presentation
Neurologic signs may include back pain, lameness, proprioception deficits, atrophy of muscles with sciatic nerve
innervation, progressive paraparesis, tail weakness, urinary then anal sphincter disturbances, and paresthesia.
Lower back pain, accentuated by clinician manipulation,
is a cardinal feature of this disease. The German Shepherd
Dog is the most commonly affected breed. Affected dogs
often maintain a characteristic posture, flexing their lumbosacral joint to increase the diameter of the vertebral
canal and intervertebral foramina, thereby decreasing
nerve root compression.

Differential diagnosis
Degenerative myelopathy, thoracolumbar disk disease,
peripheral neuropathies and myopathies, coxofemoral
arthrosis, stifle instability, semitendinosus/gracilis muscle contracture, prostatic/urogenital disease.

Diagnosis
Due to the multifaceted etiology of this syndrome, a thorough physical and neurologic examination followed by
survey radiographs (Figures 5.18, 15.19) and myelography and/or epidurography studies may be required for
a diagnosis. Lumbosacral pain can usually be elicited by
applying digital pressure on the spinous processes of L7
and S1 with the dog standing. Extension of the hips (lordosis test) can be done simultaneously to elicit a response.
Digital palpation of the lumbosacral joint per rectum may

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

15.18

645

ANOMALIES
ECTRODACTYLY
Definition/overview

Figure 15.18 Cauda equina in a 10-year-old female German
Shepherd Dog presented for pain when defecating. Cauda equina
syndrome may result in entrapment of one or more of the
terminal lumbar nerve roots. Survey radiographic findings such
as sclerosis, vertebral malalignment, and/or spondylosis of the
lumbosacral joint may be suggestive of this diagnosis (arrow).

15.19

Skeletal growth disorders that are apparent at birth or
manifest later in young animals are of two main types:
generalized dysplasias and localized malformations
of individual bones. Ectrodactyly (Gr. ectro = congenital absence) (split hand or lobster claw deformity) is an
abnormal limb development with metacarpal bone separation (Figure 15.20), digit contracture, digit aplasia,
metacarpal hypoplasia, and metacarpal fusions. The condition is usually unilateral.

Etiology
In the cat, ectrodactyly is caused by a dominant gene with
variable expression.

15.20

Figure 15.19 Cauda equina syndrome may lead to entrapment
of terminal lumbar nerve roots. Radiographs often show
sclerosis, vertebral malalignment, and spondylosis of the
lumbosacral joint.

further pinpoint the source of pain. Neurogenic intermittent claudication refers to the presentation of clinical signs associated with exercise. In this situation the
dilated radicular blood vessels crowd the adjacent nerve
root in the stenotic intervertebral foramen or lateral
recess, causing intermittent ischemia of the nerve.
MRI appears to be superior to CT for detecting spinal
stenosis caused by soft tissue proliferation and for recognizing early disk degeneration; however, MRI (like CT) is
expensive and relatively inaccessible.

Management
Surgical treatment is the best option when the pain is
continuous or there are neurologic deficits, and progression of clinical signs with conservative treatment may
negatively affect the prognosis. Surgical treatment is via
decompression by dorsal laminectomy or fixation–fusion
of the lumbosacral joint.

K22463_C015.indd 645

Figure 15.20 A number of congenital anomalies may affect
the digits. Here a syndactyly of digits 2/3 and 4/5 is seen
as metacarpals 3 and 4 are separated at the level of the
metacarpal heads. (Courtesy the late M.S. Bloomberg)

25/04/16 11:58 pm

646

Diseases of specific organ systems

Pathophysiology
The cleft between metacarpal bones may terminate just
below the carpus or extend proximally through the carpus, separating the radius and ulna entirely.

Clinical presentation
Ectrodactyly presents as absence of the central digit or
incomplete fusion of three digits. There are many variations of this condition, but typically the third digit and
metacarpal bone are absent, which produces a deep cleft
dividing the paw into ulnar and radial parts. Concomitant
congenital elbow luxation is common.

endochondral ossification defect, one or more long bones
grows in retardation.

Clinical presentation
Animals may exhibit dwarfism and there may be reduced
limb length relative to the trunk because of the discrepant development of the axial and appendicular skeleton.

Differential diagnosis

Congenital amputation.

When the condition affects one or more limbs, particularly
the forelimbs, bilateral premature closure of the physes
(radial/ulnar) can be a differential diagnosis of concern.
Genetic anomalies tend to be symmetrical. Premature physeal closure can be bilateral, and closure of the distal ulnar
physis is more sensitive to insult than the radial physis.

Diagnosis

Diagnosis

Diagnosis is made by physical examination and supporting radiographs.

Serial radiography of the long bone physes during the
rapid growth phase is often diagnostic for premature
physeal closure as a differential.

Differential diagnosis

Management
Reconstructive surgery or arthrodesis can improve
function.

Management

OSTEOCHONDRODYSPLASIA

ELBOW DYSPLASIA: UNUNITED ANCONEAL
PROCESS/FRAGMENTED CORONOID PROCESS

Definition/overview
Osteochondrodysplasia is an abnormality of cartilage or
bone growth and development. In achondroplasia, endochondral ossification of all long bones is retarded, resulting in shortened and deformed limbs. Hypochondroplasia
is similar to achondroplasia; however, the condition is
less severe. The Bulldog, Boston Terrier, Pug, Pekingese,
Japanese Spaniel, and Shih Tzu are achondroplastic,
while the Dachshund, Basset Hound, Beagle, Welsh Corgi,
Dandi Dinmont Terrier, Scottish Terrier, and Skye Terrier
are hypochondroplastic.

Etiology
In most osteochondrodyplasias there is a known or suspected genetic basis, and autosomal recessive inheritance
is common.

Pathophysiology
There are a number of syndromes of chondrodystrophia
fetalis in animals, some of them inherited, and all of them
result in disproportionate dwarfism. Dwarfism of chondrodystrophia fetalis is differentiated from primordial
dwarfism by disproportionate body form. As a result of an

K22463_C015.indd 646

Correction of severe deformities is unrewarding.

Definition/overview
The term elbow dysplasia describes generalized osteoarthrosis of the elbow joint, specifically including the conditions of ununited anconeal process (UAP) and fragmented
coronoid process (FCP) (Figure 15.21).

Etiology
Because these two diseases, together with osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) of the medial humeral condyle, overlap, the common etiology of osteochondrosis has been
proposed. Skeletally immature large and giant breed
­
dogs are affected and the condition is often bilateral.
The etiology of UAP and FCP is most often accepted to be
incongruous growth of the radius and ulna. The anconeus
develops from a separate ossification center only in large
dogs and will normally come to union with the parent
ulna by 20 weeks of age. If this union has not occurred by
this time, it is considered ununited.

Pathophysiology
It is proposed that if the radius grows faster than the ulna
in large breed dogs, it places abnormal distractive forces

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

15.21

Annular
ligament
Oblique
ligament

Humerus
Medial
epicondyle

Fragmented
medial
coronoid
process

Ununited
anconeal
process

Osteophytes
Radius

Ulna
Medial collateral
ligament (cut)

Figure 15.21 Elbow dysplasia is often a manifestation of FCP
and/or UAP.

on the anconeus through the distal end of the humerus,
destabilizing the cartilaginous attachment of the anconeus to the ulna and therefore preventing its normal
ossification.
In contrast, if the ulna grows faster than the radius,
more weight than normal is placed on the medial ulnar
coronoid. Normally the coronoid processes, together with
the radial head, bear the compressive forces from the
distal humerus. With asynchronous growth, the lateral
aspect of the medial ulnar coronoid suffers damage and
can become fragmented.

647

Diagnosis
UAP is diagnosed radiographically by a hyperflexed
lateral radiograph of the elbow revealing failure of the
anconeal process to fuse with the proximal ulna in a dog
older than 5 months of age (Figure 15.22). CT is a helpful
diagnostic aid; however, a definitive diagnosis of the type
and severity of the different conditions comprising elbow
dysplasia is obtained through arthroscopy.
Primary lesions associated with a fragmented medial
coronoid process are extremely difficult to see radiographically (Figures 15.23, 15.24). Therefore, a diagnosis of fragmented medial coronoid process is often made
based on breed, age, history, clinical signs, and physical
examination. Secondary changes such as osteophyte
deposition proximal to the anconeal process, caudal to the
distal humeral condyle, and anterior to the radial head
are radiographic findings consistent with a fragmented
medial coronoid process of long standing (Figure 15.25).
The diagnosis of FCP is often one of exclusion.

Management
Treatment for UAP is surgical; either removal or attachment of the process. Surgery to include fragment removal
and lesion curettage is the treatment of choice for FCP.
Prognosis for both conditions is dependent on the severity of secondary changes at the time of treatment. The
surgical technique of total elbow replacement was introduced in 2004, with a success rate of approximately 80%
in a limited number of cases.

15.22

Clinical presentation
Both UAP and FCP lead to forelimb lameness with an
abnormal gait. Affected dogs often hold the elbow close
to their body and outwardly rotate their foot. Joint effusion may be present and the dog resents elbow manipulation, especially hyperextension and pronation of the
antebrachium.

Differential diagnosis
Luxation/subluxation, OCD (distal humeral condyle/
humeral head), biceps brachii muscle/tendon disease.

K22463_C015.indd 647

Figure 15.22 Ununited anconeal process (arrow) is best
demonstrated in a hyperflexed lateral radiograph, which avoids
the overlapping density of the medial humeral epicondyle.
A diagnosis is made when the anconeus has not fused by
5 months of age.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

648

Diseases of specific organ systems

15.23

15.24

Figures 15.23, 15.24 The separate coronoid fragment is rarely identified because it usually occurs on the lateral aspect of the
medial coronoid process. (15.23) An intraoperative view (arrow). (15.24) Sequential views made along an arc around the elbow joint
demonstrate the difficulty with radiographic identification of the coronoid lesion, as other bony structures always silhouette this
area. The presence of secondary joint disease may be the only radiographic evidence of the fragmented coronoid. Periarticular
osteophytes may be observed on the proximal margin of the anconeal process, coronoid process, medial humeral epicondyle, or
cranial proximal radius. Sclerosis of the subchondral bone of the ulnar trochlear notch, a widened humeral–ulnar trochlear notch,
and a widened humeral–ulnar joint space may be observed. Comparison radiographs of both elbows are extremely helpful because
the lesions are often subtle.
15.25

GROWTH DEFORMITIES
Definition/overview
Trauma is the most common origin of growth deformities,
due to the exuberant nature of puppies.

Etiology
Long bones grow in length through the process of endochondral ossification, which occurs at the growth plate or
physis. Alterations in this normal process lead to growth
deformities, which are most frequently seen in the antebrachium. The most common cause of premature growth
cessation is trauma to the distal ulnar physeal plate; large
and giant breeds are most commonly affected.

Pathophysiology

Figure 15.25 Radiographic signs of elbow dysplasia include
osteophyte deposition within the anconeal process, at the
leading edge of the radial head, and on the medial humeral
condyle, as well as sclerosis of the trochlear notch of the ulna.

Conservative management consists of NSAIDs.
Chondroprotectants are also used, often in combination
with NSAIDs.

K22463_C015.indd 648

Following trauma, asymmetric growth of the physis leads
to valgus (Figure 15.26) or varus (Figure 15.27) deformation of the limb. The severity of disfigurement is dependent on the growth potential remaining after the physeal
trauma. The antebrachium is predisposed to growth
deformity because of the two-bone system and the architecture of the distal ulnar physis.

Clinical presentation
Three deformities of the radius result from premature
closure of the distal ulnar physis: lateral deviation (valgus), cranial bowing (curvus) (Figure 15.28), and external
rotation (supination). Caudolateral subluxation of the
radial carpal joint results, with stretching of the medial

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

15.26

Humerus

Osteophytes

Lateral epicondyle

Annular ligament

Radius

649

Olecranon

15.28

Lateral
collateral
ligament

Ulna

Figure 15.26 Valgus deformation of the carpus resulting from
premature closure of the distal ulnar physes.

15.27

Figure 15.28 Radius curvus can lead to disfigurement of the
entire antebrachium, including the elbow and carpus.

irreversible degenerative osteoarthritis in the carpal and
elbow joints, may be sequelae. In the severe condition,
the patient appears to be walking on its mediopalmar
metacarpals. Elbow luxation can be very painful for the
patients.

Differential diagnosis
Congenital deformity, ligamentous trauma, luxation,
fracture.

Diagnosis

Figure 15.27 Young dog with varus deformation of the carpal
joints resulting from premature closure of the distal radial
physes.

soft tissue supporting structures. The radial head may
also luxate the humeral condyles from the trochlear
notch of the ulna. Abnormal articulations, resulting in

K22463_C015.indd 649

Diagnosis is by radiography of the carpal and elbow
joints (Figures 15.29, 15.30), comparing them with the
contralateral limb if that limb is normal. The condition
is predictable when closure of the distal ulnar physis
precedes that of the distal radial physis and significant
growth remains before skeletal maturation.

Management
Surgical reconstruction.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

650

Diseases of specific organ systems

15.29

15.30

15.31

Figures 15.29, 15.30 Anterior (15.29) and lateral (15.30)
views showing the radiographic changes commonly seen with
premature closure of the distal ulnar growth plate (remodeling
of the anconeal process with sclerosis; elbow luxation with
shallowing of the trochlear notch; anterior radial bowing;
anterior and medial subluxation of the distal radius with
increased angulation of the radiocarpal joint; and secondary
arthritic changes).

Figure 15.31 Histologically, retained cartilage core, as seen
here, is a failure of normal endochondral ossification within the
distal ulna. Radiographically, an inverted radiolucent cone may
be observed extending proximally from the distal ulnar physis
into the metaphysis. This condition may lead to deformation of
the carpus as is seen in the condition radius curvus.

RETAINED ENDOCHONDRAL CARTILAGE CORE

Pathophysiology

Definition/overview

In Great Dane pups, formation of cartilage core in the distal ulnar and tibial metaphyses has been associated with
feeding excess calcium.

Retained endochondral cartilage core occurs in the distal ulnar metaphysis of immature large and giant breed
dogs, appearing as a radiolucent inverted cone.

Etiology
The etiology of the disorder is not understood. The core
is a result of improper mineralization (Figure 15.31); fortunately, most cases of retained endochondral cartilage
core do not persist long enough to produce a deformity.
This same condition may be seen in the lateral femoral
condyle, leading to genu valgum, a predisposition to
‘knock-knees’ and lateral patellar luxation.

K22463_C015.indd 650

Clinical presentation
The condition is often self-resolving and an incidental
radiographic finding; however, it may be associated with
varying degrees of growth retardation after 5 months
of age.

Diagnosis
Radiography of the distal ulna. A radiolucent core of cartilage 5–10 mm wide and 2–6 cm long extending from the distal ulnar physis into metaphyseal bone is pathognomonic.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

651

Management

Diagnosis

Reconstructive surgery is the treatment of choice for
deformities resulting from retained endochondral cartilage core.

METABOLIC DISORDERS

The earliest radiographic abnormality seen is an increase
in intramedullary density (Figures 15.32–15.35). Initially
unifocal with indistinct margins, lesions coalesce as the
disease progresses. There is no correlation between radiographic signs, degree of lameness, and amount of pain
elicited on deep palpation of the limb.

PANOSTEITIS

Management

Definition/overview

Treatment with analgesics (NSAIDs) and supportive care
yields excellent results, although the course of treatment
may be prolonged.

Panosteitis is a disease of the fatty bone marrow, with
­secondary involvement of bone.

Etiology
The cause is poorly understood; some authors have implicated a viral role.

15.32

Pathophysiology
Medullary enostosis and occasional subperiosteal new
bone formation are characteristic of this self-limiting disease in young, large, or giant breeds of dogs, which may
last up to 18 months. Pain may be due to disturbance of
endosteal and periosteal elements, vascular congestion,
or high intramedullary pressure. German Shepherd Dogs
are most commonly affected.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of lameness usually appear in immature
dogs, with a prevalence in males, but onset has been
documented as late as 5 years of age. Episodic lameness
lasts 2–3 weeks, with bouts persisting for 2–9 months.
Lameness may range from mild to severe, involve one
or more bones, and be persistent or intermittent. Other
signs include anorexia, lethargy, pyrexia, and weight
loss. The ulna is most commonly affected, although
the radius, humerus, femur, and tibia may also show
involvement.
Clinical signs are usually associated with pain, which
can be elicited with deep palpation of the affected bone
and which often self-resolves by the time the dog reaches
18–20 months of age. Mild depression, inappetence, and
weight loss may occur in severely affected patients.

Differential diagnosis
Osteochondrosis, elbow dysplasia, fractures, ligamentous
injury, immune-mediated arthritides, Lyme disease, bacterial endocarditis.

K22463_C015.indd 651

Figure 15.32 Radiographic findings of panosteitis center
around the nutrient foramina. The early phase begins with
an increase in endosteal and medullary density, with blurring
of the normal trabecular pattern. In the second phase the
densities tend to coalesce, become patchy and mottled, and
fill the medullary canal. After 4–6 weeks the medullary canal
regains a normal or decreased density and cortical thickening
may persist. A differential diagnosis list should include bone
neoplasm and hematogenous osteomyelitis.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

652

Diseases of specific organ systems

Humerus

15.33

15.35

Olecranon
Medial epicondyle

Lesion

Oblique ligament
Medial collateral
ligament

Radius

Trabeculae
of bone

Medullary cavity
Ulna

15.34

Figures 15.33–15.35 Radiography of panosteitis reveals areas
of increased density within the medullary canal. The disease is
most commonly seen in long bones such as the tibia and ulna.

OSTEOCHONDROSIS

Etiology

Definition/overview

The etiology of the disease is multifactorial, with genetic,
nutritional, and environmental contributions.

Osteochondrosis is an endochondral ossification defect,
the term denoting a dissecting lesion between articular
cartilage and underlying bone. Once articular cartilage
dissects free from the underlying calcified tissue, the
lesion of OCD has formed.

K22463_C015.indd 652

Pathophysiology
Local matrix degeneration secondary to defects in the
nutritional supply to the cartilage is likely to be responsible for the lesions. The degeneration produces areas

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

653

15.37

of epiphyseal cartilage that are prone to stress-induced
necrosis. Once the chrondrocytes have died, the surrounding cartilage matrix is unable to mineralize and therefore
blood vessels with their accompanying osteogenic mesenchyme fail to penetrate the cartilage and normal ossification is prevented.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of lameness appear between 4 and
12 months of age, mostly in large and giant breeds of
dogs. Bones affected include the humeral head, medial
humeral condyle, femoral condyles, and talus.

Intra-articular (osteochondral) fractures, elbow dysplasia, panosteitis, periarticular ligamentous injury.

Figure 15.37 Humeral head osteochondrosis appears grossly
with fibrillation and eburnation and may include joint mice, as
seen in this case. Also note the thickened joint capsule, which
might manifest clinically as restricted range of motion.

Diagnosis

Management

The typical lesion appears radiographically as a flattened
radiolucent defect in the subchondral bone immediately
beneath the articular cartilage. Free-floating, mineralized cartilage fragments (‘joint mice’) may also be present
within the affected joint (Figures 15.36, 15.37).

Treatment is surgical. Pain and lameness in a dog with
radiographic evidence of osteochondrosis are an indication for surgical exploration. All loose cartilage fragments, including joint mice, are removed from the joint
and the lesion is curettaged to stimulate the articular surface defect to heal by fibrocartilage formation. Although
clinical severity is not correlated with radiographic
findings, the prognosis is based on secondary changes.
Shoulder and stifle lesions typically yield a better prognosis than elbow and tarsus lesions. Although not curative, NSAIDs are useful to treat symptomatically the pain
associated with DJD.

Differential diagnosis

15.36

Humerus
Oblique
ligament

CRANIOMANDIBULAR OSTEOPATHY
Lateral
epicondyle

Medial
epicondyle
Lesion

Lateral
collateral
ligament

Medial
collateral
ligament
Detached cartilage

Annular
ligament

Craniomandibular osteopathy is a proliferative non-­
neoplastic disease of the flat bones in the skull, where
mandibular lamellar bone is resorbed and juvenile bone
is produced. Scottish Terriers and West Highland White
Terriers between 3 and 6 months of age are most commonly affected (Figure 15.38).

Etiology

Ulna
Radius

Figure 15.36 Humeral head osteochondrosis appears grossly
with fibrillation and eburnation, and may include joint mice, as
seen in this case. Also note the thickened joint capsule, which
may manifest clinically as restricted range of motion.

K22463_C015.indd 653

Definition/overview

The condition is inherited in West Highland White
Terriers and there may be a genetic predisposition in
Scottish Terriers. However, as the condition occurs sporadically in other breeds, there may be several causes.

Pathophysiology
The disease is characterized by resorption of existing
lamellae, vascular fibrous stroma in place of marrow
spaces, proliferation of coarse trabecular bone beyond

25/04/16 11:58 pm

654

Diseases of specific organ systems

15.38

Figure 15.38 This young West Highland White Terrier has
severe osteoproliferative pathology involving the mandible
and temporomandibular joint. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

normal periosteal boundaries, and infiltration by inflammatory cells at the periphery of new bone. New primitive
bone shows a mosaic pattern of cement lines.

Clinical presentation
Animals are usually presented because of pain on opening the mouth, although lethargy, anorexia, pyrexia,
excess salivation, prehension difficulties, lymphadenopathy, temporal muscle atrophy, weight loss, and dehydration may also be seen. The clinical course may fluctuate,
with periods of remission and exacerbation.

15.39

Figure 15.39 Lateral radiograph showing pronounced
mandibular periosteal proliferation. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
(See also Chapter 11: Endocrine disorders.)

Definition/overview

Osteomyelitis, traumatic periostitis, neoplasia.

Hyperparathyroidism results from increased production
and release of parathyroid hormone (PTH) and its subsequent metabolic role in bone resorption. Bone is replaced
by fibrous tissue. Primary hyperparathyroidism associated with hyperplasia or neoplasia of the parathyroid
glands is the less common form, while secondary hyperparathyroidism is more common in dogs and is associated with renal disease or a nutritional deficiency.

Diagnosis

Etiology

Skull radiographs demonstrate bilaterally symmetrical
periosteal lesions involving the mandible and temporal
bones. Osseous proliferation of the mandible or tympanic
bulla and periosteal new bone formation may be seen
around the temporomandibular junction (Figure 15.39).

Excessive synthesis and secretion of PTH may be due to
hyperplasia of the parathyroids either directly (adenomas, carcinomas) or by nonendocrine changes in calcium
and phosphate hemostasis (e.g. diets deficient in calcium
or rich in phosphate).

Management

Pathophysiology

Craniomandibular osteopathy is a self-limiting disease
for which treatment is directed at supporting the animal
(with inclusion of analgesic therapy) until the condition
regresses. In severely affected nonresolving cases, resection of the condyloid process of the mandible or a partial
hemimandibulectomy may be considered. NSAID treatment can reduce pain and discomfort. The poorest prognosis is associated with deposition of bone surrounding
the temporomandibular joint. Prolonged glucocorticoid
therapy can slow disease progression if started early.

PTH promotes mineral resorption from bone to correct
imbalances in blood calcium and phosphate concentrations. Generalized osteopenia may occur in adults.

Differential diagnosis

K22463_C015.indd 654

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs reflect the severity of the primary problem and skeletal involvement is often first manifest in
bones of the skull and jaw. Loss of lamina dura dentes
may lead to loosening of teeth and mastication problems,
while resorption of alveolar bone, seen radiographically

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

15.40

655

and giant breeds of dogs. Although all bones are susceptible, the distal radius and ulna are most commonly
affected. Metaphyses are widened due to perimetaphyseal swelling and bone deposition.

Etiology

Figure 15.40 Hyperparathyroidism may cause extensive bony
demineralization that involves the skull, vertebral column, and
long bones. Pathologic fractures may result from extensive loss
of mineral in the long bones and vertebral bodies. In dogs there
is a tendency for renal secondary hyperparathyroidism to cause
more severe bone loss in the skull, while nutritional secondary
hyperparathyroidism causes more severe changes in the long
bones, as shown in this radiograph. (Courtesy B.R. Jones)

as demineralization, can lead to pathologic fractures
(Figure 15.40). Signs of associated hypercalcemia may
include muscle weakness, nephrocalcinosis, urolithiasis,
constipation, anorexia, vomiting, polyuria, or polydipsia.

Differential diagnosis
Dietary insufficiencies, renal disease.

Diagnosis

The cause of the disease is unknown. Hypotheses including the influence of hypovitaminosis C, dietary oversupplementation, and infectious organisms have not been
validated. HOD has been diagnosed in a number of different dog breeds. Weimaraners appear to have a strong
heritable predisposition, and an immune mechanism is
likely involved.

Pathophysiology
The pathogenesis is obscure; however, a disturbance of
the metaphyseal blood supply leads to a failure or delay
in ossification of the hypertrophic zone of the metaphyseal growth plate. The disease is usually bilaterally symmetrical and episodic. Some cases recover within a few
days, but others have one or more relapses over several
weeks before recovery.

Clinical presentation
Presenting signs involve some degree of lameness where
the metaphyseal region of the long bones may be swollen, warm, and painful on palpation (Figure 15.41). The
disease may be accompanied by depression, inappetence,
and variable pyrexia.

With nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism in
young animals, radiographs may show thin long bone
cortices and an apparently abnormally wide medullary
cavity.

Differential diagnosis

Management

Diagnosis

Prognosis is based on successful treatment of the underlying cause. While bisphosphonates have been used to
decrease the hypercalcemia, surgical excision of parathyroid adenoma or adenocarcinoma is the treatment
of choice for primary hyperparathyroidism. Two to
4 months may be required for cortical thickness to return
to normal and complications are generally related to
delayed fracture union or malunions.

Necrosis and resorption of the metaphyseal trabeculae
may be seen radiographically as an irregular radiolucent line in the metaphyses adjacent to the growth plates
(Figure 15.42). Subperiosteal new bone formation (likely
hematoma mineralization) may be mild or extensive in
the area of the metaphyseal growth plate.

HYPERTROPHIC OSTEODYSTROPHY
Definition/overview
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HOD) (metaphyseal osteopathy) is a metaphyseal bone disease of immature large

K22463_C015.indd 655

Panosteitis, elbow dysplasia, OCD, polyarthritis, septic metaphysitis, retained cartilage core, canine
osteochondrodysplasia.

Management
Treatment is largely supportive, with rest, analgesics,
anti-inflammatory drugs, and attention to a proper diet.
Vitamin C supplementation has no efficacy. Antibiotics
may be indicated for treatment of secondary infection, if
identified. Animals with mild lesions have a good to excellent prognosis, while the severely affected carry a guarded

25/04/16 11:58 pm

656

Diseases of specific organ systems

15.41

the immune suppressive action of ­corticosteroids may be
preferential for achieving remission.

HYPERADRENOCORTICISM
(See also Chapter 11: Endocrine disorders.)

Definition/overview
Hyperadrenocorticism is found in the presence of
Cushing’s disease or with chronic excessive administration of glucocorticoids.

Etiology
15.42

There are several recognized causes of hyperadrenocorticism: a pituitary tumor, which synthesizes and
secretes excess adrenocorticotrophic hormone (pituitary-­
dependent hyperadrenocorticism [PDH]); adrenocortical
tumors, which randomly secrete excessive cortisol independently of the pituitary (adrenocortical-­
dependent);
and administration of excessive glucocorticoids (e.g. drugs
for skin, ear, and eye conditions [iatrogenic]).

Pathophysiology
Osteoporosis of the spine and long bones can be associated with this disease in dogs, as calcium absorption from
the gut, urinary excretion of calcium, normal production
of bone matrix, and fibroblast as well as osteoblast proliferation and differentiation are affected.

Clinical presentation

Figures 15.41, 15.42 This approximately 2–3-month-old
Weimaraner puppy (15.41) suffered from severe debilitating
effects of hypertrophic osteodystrophy. Note the marked
swelling of the carpal metaphyseal region (15.42). Bacterial
physitis with sepsis was also present. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Poodles, Dachshunds, Boston Terriers, Boxers, and Beagles
have been reported to be at higher risk than other breeds.
In general, endogenous hyperadrenocorticism affects
middle aged to old animals; however, the iatrogenic
form can be seen in young dogs. Severity of signs varies
depending on the duration and degree of cortisol excess.
The most apparent signs are polyuria and polydipsia,
polyphagia, and a pendulous abdomen. Lethargy, muscle
weakness, muscle atrophy, panting, obesity, hyperpigmentation, calcinosis cutis, and facial nerve palsy can
also occur. Cats show similar signs and are commonly
poorly controlled diabetics as well.

Differential diagnosis
prognosis (death and euthanasia are not uncommon).
There is no specific treatment for the disease, although
anti-inflammatory analgesia (NSAIDs) can be palliative
and physical rehabilitation activities may be beneficial. In
one study of Weimaraners, treatment with corticosteroids
was superior to treatment with NSAIDs, suggesting that

K22463_C015.indd 656

Hypothyroidism, acromegaly, renal disease, hepatopathy,
diabetes mellitus, ligament rupture.

Diagnosis
Radiography will reveal the extent of bone involvement
(Figure 15.43). A urine cortisol:creatinine ratio is a very

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

15.43

657

Etiology
Primary lesions occur on the skin and may arise de novo
or from overexposure to sunlight. Cats are predisposed
to this type of cancer because of a lack of skin pigmentation and a desire to seek sunlight. The lesions are
highly ­erosive and deeply infiltrative and, although late
to metastasize, may spread to bone. SCC in cats occurs
­frequently in the oral cavity and less frequently involves
the digits.

Pathophysiology
Figure 15.43 Lumbar vertebrae showing osteopenia. (Courtesy
M. Schaer)

Unknown; however,
anywhere.

SCC

can

metastasize

almost

Clinical presentation
practical screening test. A diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism is made by dexamethasone ­suppression testing or
ACTH response testing. Abdominal radiography, ultrasonography, CT, and MRI are all useful in differentiating
PDH from adrenal tumors.

Management
Surgery is not an option. Medical management for treating both PDH and adrenal tumors in dogs is with ­o,p’-DDD.
Trilostane is now used commonly for treating PDH in
dogs and cats.

NEOPLASIA
Bone neoplasms may arise from bone tissue elements
or they may invade bone by local extension or distant
metastasis. The majority of primary bone tumors are
malignant. While the most frequent clinical signs in dogs
and cats with appendicular bone tumors are pain or lameness referable to the primary tumor, signs of axial skeletal neoplasms reflect the tumor location. Radiographic
findings such as periosteal new bone formation and bone
destruction may support a diagnosis of neoplasia, but a
definitive diagnosis is made histologically from a bone
biopsy. Primary bone tumors and bone metastases are
infrequent in cats.

SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA
Definition/overview
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is a common tumor involving the skin in both the dog and cat, and it is a common
feline neoplasm involving bone. SCCs are usually found
in nonpigmented or lightly pigmented skin.

K22463_C015.indd 657

The most common cutaneous locations for SCC in the
dog are the toes, scrotum, nose, limbs, and anus, while
the nose, eyelids, lips, and pinnae are common locations in the cat. Lesions vary from a red firm plaque to
a c­auliflower-like ulceration and they may appear as
sequelae to crusts, ulcers, or masses that may have been
present for months and been unresponsive to conservative treatment. SCC located deep to teeth can be a reason
for premature tooth loosening.

Differential diagnosis
Draining abscessation, nail bed infection/osteomyelitis, eosinophilic granuloma, mast cell tumor, cutaneous
lymphosarcoma.

Diagnosis
Biopsy or cytology.

Management
Superficial tumors are treated by surgery, cryosurgery,
or irradiation. Digits with tumor involvement should be
amputated. Cisplatin and mitoxantrone have provided
remission (generally only for a short duration) where
surgical excision is incomplete, the mass is nonresectable, or the patient has metastasis. When lesions are
advanced and bone involvement is present, the prognosis
is guarded.

PAROSTEAL OSTEOSARCOMA IN THE CAT
Definition/overview
Parosteal osteosarcoma is the second most common bone
tumor in the cat.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

658

Diseases of specific organ systems

Etiology

Pathophysiology

The cause is unknown.

No pathophysiologic pathway has been identified.
Osteosarcomas have been reported at locations where
metallic implants have been used for fracture fixation, as
well as at previous fracture sites or where there is chronic
inflammation.

Pathophysiology
Typically, the lesions appear as a mixed proliferative or
lytic pattern in the metaphyseal region of the affected
bone. The formation of periosteal bone in adjacent tissue
leads to the development of Codman’s triangle, comprising proliferation of the periosteum and mild destruction
of cortical tissue.

Clinical presentation
Lesions are slow growing, but affected sites can elicit pain.

Differential diagnosis
Metastatic lesion,
osteomyelitis.

other

primary

bone

tumor,

Diagnosis
Radiographically, parosteal tumors appear less aggressive than periosteal tumors. The lesions are moderately
well-circumscribed and lysis of the cortex is usually mild.
Biopsy specimens must be evaluated carefully for areas
of tumor cells, as lesions may be misdiagnosed as reactive
bone, chondroma, or osteoma.

Clinical presentation
The majority of osteosarcomas originate in the metaph­
yses of long bones, with a higher frequency in the forelimbs. Tumors are most prevalent away from the elbow
and around the stifle. Animals usually present with
swelling and lameness of the affected limb. Swelling may
or may not involve soft tissue. The tumor is seen arising
on the outer surface of the cortex of the humerus, femur,
frontal bones, and ramus of the mandible. Although
osteosarcomas generally do not cross articular cartilage,
adjacent bones can be affected, but generally through
periarticular soft tissue or if the tumor is a telangiectatic
osteosarcoma. Owing to the sudden onset of swelling and
pain, a non-neoplastic orthopedic problem can be mistakenly assumed.

Differential diagnosis

Management

Metastatic lesion, other primary bone tumor, osteomyelitis. Osteosarcoma should be ruled out in any large breed
dog presenting with sudden lameness.

Frequently, amputation of the affected limb or area of
tumor will be curative.

Diagnosis

OSTEOSARCOMA
Definition/overview
Osteosarcoma is the most frequently reported (70–80%)
primary bone tumor in cats. Solitary osteolytic metaphyseal long bone lesions in older cats are considered osteosarcoma until proven otherwise; these lesions tend to be
less aggressive than canine osteosarcoma.
Osteosarcoma is the most common (85%) bone tumor
in the dog. At greatest risk are the Saint Bernard, Great
Dane, Golden Retriever, Irish Setter, Dobermann, and
German Shepherd Dog.

Etiology
The cause is unknown. The association of osteosarcoma
with metaphyseal bone, however, suggests that neoplastic transformation may result from aberrant bone growth
or differentiation. Some dogs may be genetically predisposed, as mutation and inactivation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene have been found.

K22463_C015.indd 658

A presumptive diagnosis can be made by radiography,
which may reveal Codman’s triangle and the proliferative or lytic pattern of the metaphyseal bone region
(Figure 15.44). Pain is often elicited with deep palpation
over the site. If treatment is considered, the extent of disease metastasis should be determined by a radiographic
survey of the thorax or skeleton. A small percentage
(5–10%) of affected animals have detectable lung lesions.
Diagnosis is made by bone biopsy.

Management
Wide surgical excision or amputation is the treatment
of choice. The tumor grows rapidly and treatment is
unrewarding. Cisplatin is the chemotherapy of choice
for treatment of osteosarcoma in dogs (toxic to cats).
However, microscopic metastasis is common by the time
of diagnosis. Survival is <6 months with limb ­amputation
and <18 months if there is additional c­hemotherapy.
Osteosarcoma in cats is less aggressive and amputation alone yields a median survival of >4 years. Since
osteosarcoma is often associated with considerable

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

15.44

659

15.45

Figure 15.45 Chondrosarcoma of the proximal scapula
characterized by both destruction and proliferation. (Courtesy
I.A. Robertson)
Figure 15.44 Osteosarcomas may produce a localized soft
tissue swelling containing mineralized foci. In this case the
carpus was swollen. There is extensive bony destruction, with
the cortex eroded at several sites.

pain, management with NSAIDs may be appropriate
for dogs. Furthermore, there is some speculation that
COX-2-specific NSAIDs manifest antitumor mechanisms.
Adjunctive analgesics such as opioids, N-methyl-daspartate antagonists, and ion channel regulators may be
necessary to control the pain.

CHONDROSARCOMA
Definition/overview
Chondrosarcoma is the second most common bone tumor
in dogs (Figure 15.45). Lesions can originate in the ribs
(most common primary rib tumor), long bones, extra­
skeletal sites, nasal cavity, vertebrae, facial bones, pelvis, digits, and os penis. The nasal cavity is commonly
affected. This tumor is uncommon in cats.

Etiology
The cause is unknown, although lesions can occur in cases
of multiple cartilaginous exostosis.

K22463_C015.indd 659

Pathophysiology
Anaplastic cartilage cells between and within the tumors
show various stages of differentiation and maturation.
Metastasis may occur in any tissue, but most commonly
in lung tissue.

Clinical presentation
Chondrosarcoma occurs commonly in ribs, nasal bones,
and the pelvis. Pain on palpation of the lesion is common
and swelling may occur at the tumor site. Intrathoracic
extension of tumors may give rise to pleural effusion.

Differential diagnosis
Other primary bone tumors, osteomyelitis.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on biopsy and histopathologic
examination.

Management
The prognosis is good to guarded if complete excision
of the tumor is accomplished. Chemotherapy with cisplatin is appropriate for nonresectable tumors; however, response of chondrosarcomas to radiation and
­chemotherapy is poor.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

660

Diseases of specific organ systems

VASCULAR TUMORS OF BONE

Clinical presentation

Definition/overview

History and presenting signs are similar to those for
osteosarcoma. Osteolysis is the dominant radiographic
feature.

Primary vascular tumors of bone are infrequently
encountered, but they are virtually all malignant. Any
bone may be affected, but the axial skeleton is more
frequently affected than the appendicular skeleton.
Hemangiosarcoma of the bone is more common in the
dog than in the cat, and the German Shepherd Dog is
most frequently at risk.

Differential diagnosis
Telangiectatic osteosarcoma (Figures 15.46–15.48).

Diagnosis

These tumors rapidly metastasize via hematogenous
routes to the liver and lungs. They can rupture, leading to
acute hemorrhage and sudden death.

Radiographically, hemangiosarcomas show massive
destruction, often involving one-half or more of the
entire bone shaft. Destruction tends to remain confined
within the medullary cavity with both proximal and distal expansion. Marked periosteal new bone formation is
not characteristic but may be seen (Figure 15.49), and
pathologic fractures may occur. Hemangiosarcomas often
have vascular spaces and biopsy for diagnosis may be
nondiagnostic. Therefore, it is prudent to biopsy at the
periphery of the tumor to obtain distinct cores of tissue.

15.46

15.47

Etiology
Hemangiosarcoma is a malignancy of vascular endothelial cells or their precursors.

Pathophysiology

15.48

Figures 15.46–15.48 This dog was lame on her right
hindlimb for several weeks before she had a sudden onset
of hemorrhagic swelling in the thigh muscle region (15.46).
Radiographs showed considerable osteolysis of the femur. The
primary differential diagnosis included a hemangiosarcoma,
but histopathology showed the lesion to be a telangiectatic
osteosarcoma that had hemorrhaged into the thigh muscles
(15.47, 15.48). (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C015.indd 660

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

661

15.49

15.50

Figure 15.50 Mandibular fibrosarcoma in an 8-year-old
Rottweiler.

Pathophysiology
This fibroblastic tumor produces bundles of collagenous
fibers but no neoplastic bone, osteoid, or cartilage either
in the primary tumor or its metastases. It is often difficult
to determine if the tumor is primarily a bone neoplasm
or a soft tissue neoplasm invading bone. Fibrosarcomas
produce bone lysis with minimal reactive bone response.

Clinical presentation
Figure 15.49 Pelvic hemangiosarcoma. This lesion is
characterized by soft tissue swelling and periosteal
proliferation.

Animals with oral lesions (Figure 15.50) usually present
with fleshy, pink, firm, sessile masses in the palate or gingiva, which deeply infiltrate soft tissue and bone. Long
bones may have swelling, typically at a metaphyseal site,
and the site is often painful to palpation.

Management

Differential diagnosis

Affected dogs must be thoroughly staged with thoracic
and abdominal radiography, bone scintigraphy, or bone
survey radiography. Prognosis is poor irrespective of surgical excision and adjunct chemotherapy.

Osteomyelitis, other primary bone tumors (osteosarcoma,
chondrosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma).

FIBROSARCOMA
Definition/overview

Diagnosis
Biopsy specimens should be carefully examined as it is
difficult to distinguish fibroblastic osteosarcoma from
fibrosarcoma.

Primary fibrosarcoma of bone originates from the fibrous
components of the medulla and is the third most common
primary bone neoplasm in dogs. Primary fibrosarcoma
of bone is rare in cats; parosteal or soft tissue origin is
more common and axial skeleton sites are more common
than appendicular sites. This neoplasm tends to be locally
invasive but late to metastasize.

Management

Etiology

Synovial cell sarcoma is the most frequent tumor of soft
tissue that involves adjacent bones.

Unknown.

K22463_C015.indd 661

Treatment is with surgical excision and the prognosis is
guarded. There is no suggestion that chemotherapy may
be advantageous.

SYNOVIAL CELL SARCOMA
Definition/overview

25/04/16 11:58 pm

662

Diseases of specific organ systems

15.51

Etiology
This tumor may arise from precursor mesenchymal cells
outside the synovial membrane of articular structures.

Pathophysiology
The biological behavior of this tumor is variable. Synovial
cell sarcoma is a disease of middle aged to older dogs, and
is rarely reported in cats. Joints most commonly involved
are the stifle, elbow, carpus, tibiotarsal, and p
­ halangeal
joints. Nearly half of affected patients ultimately develop
metastasis involving the lungs or regional lymph nodes.

Clinical presentation
Examination of the affected joint may reveal swelling,
pain, and a decreased range of motion. Joint swelling typically involves both sides of the joint.

Differential diagnosis
Primary bone tumor, osteoarthritis, osteomyelitis, villonodular synovitis.

Diagnosis
Radiographic evidence of a destructive lesion involving
bones on both sides of a joint suggests synovial sarcoma,
and both the stifle and the elbow are sites of predilection
(Figures 15.51–15.54). A biopsy of both the soft tissue
lesion and associated bone is diagnostic. Regional lymph
node cytology may also be diagnostic.

15.52

15.53

Figure 15.51 Synovial cell sarcoma with soft tissue swelling of
the elbow and erosion of the olecranon (proximal ulna) (arrow).
Synovial cell sarcoma is most often seen in the elbow and
stifle. The tumor usually crosses the joint space. The lesion is
predominantly osteolytic, periosteal proliferation is minimal,
and soft tissue mineralization is rare. (Courtesy A.M. Walker)

15.54

Figures 15.52–15.54 Radiographic lesions diagnosed as synovial cell sarcoma of the tarsometatarsal joint, with metastatic lesions
in the thorax. (Courtesy B. Poteet)

K22463_C015.indd 662

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

Management
The prognosis after surgery is variable, with recurrence
being not uncommon. Survival after excisional biopsy
and combination chemotherapy has been reported; however, metastasis occurs in up to 50% of cases.

663

HYPERVITAMINOSIS A
Definition/overview
Hypervitaminosis A is a disease of cats that consume
large amounts of raw liver.

NUTRITIONAL DISORDERS

Etiology

RICKETS/OSTEOMALACIA

Excessive and prolonged intake of vitamin A either from
supplements or liver-rich diets.

Definition/overview

Pathophysiology

Inadequate supplies of cholecalciferol or vitamin D result
in rickets or osteomalacia (adult equivalent), diseases
affecting the hypertrophic zone of metaphyseal growth
plates.

The condition is characterized by cervical and thoracic
bridging exostoses and limb joint periarticular ankylosis,
especially in the elbow.

Etiology

Animals may present with irritability, poor grooming,
lethargy, depression, gingivitis, and lameness. In the
early stages the lesions are painful and they may ankylose, leading to abnormal posture and neck stiffness.

Likely causes include dietary deficiency (hypovitaminosis D), impaired absorption or an inadequate concentration of minerals from the diet, and an inborn error in
the metabolism of vitamin D. Dogs and cats are mainly
dependent on vitamin D from their diet due to an inability to synthesize cholecalciferol in skin exposed to ultraviolet light.

Clinical presentation

Differential diagnosis
Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism, hypovitaminosis D.

Pathophysiology

Diagnosis

There is a failure of mineralization of cartilage and osteoid. The costochondral junctions and metaphyses may be
enlarged so that the joints appear swollen.

Radiographically there is evidence of exostoses and
enthesophytes in the cranial and thoracic vertebrae, particularly in older affected animals (Figures 15.55–15.57).
There may also be enthesophytes around limb joints (e.g.
the elbow or shoulder).

Clinical presentation
Immature animals with rickets or mature animals with
osteomalacia may be presented with lameness, difficulty
rising, a stiff gait, limb bowing, pathologic fractures, or
sudden paralysis.

15.55

Differential diagnosis
Hyperparathyroidism.

Diagnosis
Radiographic signs may be similar to hyperparathyroidism and commonly include radiolucent cortical bone due
to poor mineralization, thin cortices, bowed diaphyses,
and a loss of lamina dura dentes.

Management
Treatment consists of proper dietary supplementation
with adequate but not excessive amounts of calcium,
phosphorus, and vitamin D, and repair of any pathologic
fractures.

K22463_C015.indd 663

Figure 15.55 Thoracic rhabdomyosarcoma and long-standing
hypervitaminosis A. The tumor caused esophageal obstruction,
as shown on this barium esophagram. The hypervitaminosis A
causes the bony proliferation, as shown by the arrow. (Courtesy
M. Schaer)

25/04/16 11:58 pm

664

Diseases of specific organ systems

15.56

15.57

Figures 15.56, 15.57 Radiograph (15.56) and postmortem specimen (15.57) from an aged cat with thoracic rhabdomyosarcoma
and long-standing hypervitaminosis A. Note the characteristic bone thickening involving the lumbar vertebrae, pelvis, and scapulae
(arrows). (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Management
Treatment is aimed at avoidance of excess vitamin A. In
elderly cats, despite bone remodeling, there may be rigidity from anklyosis. In young animals, bone growth may
be permanently affected.

INFLAMMATION
SUPPURATIVE OSTEOMYELITIS
Definition/overview

most frequent organism isolated in the dog and cat with
osteomyelitis is S. aureus.

Clinical presentation
In acute conditions, animals may present with signs of
systemic illness including inappetence, dullness, weight
loss, and pyrexia. Affected periosteum and surrounding
muscle may appear swollen and painful and feel hot. In
chronic conditions, animals may present with fibrosis,
muscle atrophy, lymphadenopathy, and contracture.

Suppurative osteomyelitis is a bacterial (rarely fungal)
contamination of bone leading to the formation of pus.

Differential diagnosis

Etiology

Diagnosis

About half of infections are caused by Staphylococcus
aureus, whereas polymicrobial infections can be caused
by Streptococcus spp. and gram-negative bacteria such
as Pseudomonas spp., Klebsiella spp., Escherichia coli, and
Proteus spp. Sometimes, anaerobic bacteria are involved.
Bone is relatively resistant to infection unless there is a
concurrent soft tissue injury, bone necrosis, sequestration, fracture instability, implanted foreign material,
altered host defenses, or some combination.

Diagnosis is usually determined from the history, physical
examination, microbiology, and radiology. Radiography
reveals swelling of soft tissue (Figures 15.58, 15.59) in
acute cases but no osseous changes, whereas in chronic
cases there is evidence of formation of periosteal new
bone, which appears as radially oriented, spiculated, and
extensive growth. Bone resorption leads to lysis of the
medulla, rounding of the ends of fractured bones, and
thinning of the cortex. Osteomyelitis can virtually be
diagnosed by the presence of sequestra. Bacterial culture
should confirm the diagnosis and determine antibacterial selection.

Pathophysiology
Associated soft tissue changes are visible within 24 hours.
These include swelling and loss of fascial planes; sometimes, a fistulous tract may develop. Bone changes, bony
lysis, areas of periosteal new bone formation, or presence
of a sequestrum do not become apparent until 10–14 days
after introduction of the infection. Bacteriologically, the

K22463_C015.indd 664

Neoplasia, bone cysts, HOD, medullary bone infarction.

Management
Drugs that readily cross the capillary membrane of
bone and are widely distributed in interstitial fluid
include ­
beta-lactams (cephalosporins, penicillins),

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

15.58

665

Spinous process of L5

15.59

Accessory process

Transverse process (cut)
Body of L5

15.60

Cauda equina

Osteophytes
Endplate lysis

Figure 15.60 Illustration of diskospondylitis, where new bone
production is appearing in adjacent vertebrae.

Figures 15.58, 15.59 Postoperative radiographs showing
typical features of osteomyelitis.

aminoglycosides, and quinolones. Acute osteomyelitis is
usually cured after 4–6 weeks of antibacterial treatment,
whereas such treatment is pointless in chronic cases
without débridement and surgical removal of sequestra.
Antibiotic-impregnated beads have been used in chronic
cases. Recurrence of infection may require repeated sequestrectomy, débridement, microbiologic culturing, drainage,
fracture stabilization, bone grafting, or implant removal.

DISKOSPONDYLITIS
(See also Chapter 14: Disorders of the nervous system and
muscle.)

Definition/overview
Diskospondylitis (vertebral osteomyelitis) usually
involves a hematogenous spread of coagulase-positive
staphylococcal bacteria (may also be fungal) that localizes in the vertebral metaphysis and extends to the adjacent disk. Common primary sites of infection are skin,
heart, and urinary tract. The disease is common in dogs
but rare in cats. Large dogs are most commonly affected
and predisposed sites are L7/S1, the caudal cervical area,
and the mid-thoracic spine.

Etiology
Organisms associated with diskospondylitis are
Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus intermedius, Brucella
canis, Streptococcus spp., Escherichia coli, Pasteurella multocida, Actinomyces viscosus, Norcardia spp., Mycobacterium
avium, Aspergillus spp., Paecilomyces variotii, Mucor spp.,

K22463_C015.indd 665

and Fusarium spp. Occasionally, the cause is foreign
body migration or extension of local soft tissue infection
caused by bite wounds (cats).

Pathophysiology
Early lesions may comprise only lytic areas in affected
vertebral endplates, whereas advanced lesions show
both bone lysis and extensive new bone production (Figure 15.60). Neurologic dysfunction is usually
associated with spinal cord compression caused by
proliferation of bone and fibrous tissue or meninges
­
infection.

Clinical presentation
Progressive clinical signs include both systemic illness such as anorexia, depression, and pyrexia, and
neurologic signs such as hyperesthesia or paralysis.
­
Focal or multifocal areas of spinal pain are a common
presenting sign.

Differential diagnosis
Intervertebral disk disease, vertebral fracture/luxation,
spondylosis deformans, neoplasia, brucellosis.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually made by radiography; collapse of the
disk followed by lysis at the vertebral endplate (Figures
15.61–15.63). Lysis is a distinguishing feature from spondylosis deformans, but it is also seen in neoplasia of
the spine. However, vertebral neoplasia is uncommon
at endplates and seldom involves adjacent vertebrae.
Hemograms are often normal. Urine cultures are positive
in about 25% of patients and serologic testing for B. canis
should be performed.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

666

Diseases of specific organ systems

15.61

Figure 15.61 Diskospondylitis in a 4-year-old male Rottweiler.
Intradiskal osteomyelitis (diskospondylitis) originates in or near
the intervertebral disk and extends to the adjacent vertebra
(arrow). This disease is first seen with a loss of the densely
calcified cortical border of the vertebral body, progressing to
lysis of the vertebral endplates and, subsequently, the vertebral
bodies.

15.62

15.63

Figures 15.62, 15.63 Lateral cervical and lumbosacral
radiographs depicting Aspergillus spp. diskospondylitis at
the C6/C7 and lumbosacral interspaces in a 7-year-old male
Airedale. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C015.indd 666

Management
Treatment is based on antibiotic selection from both
blood and urine culture and analgesics for pain-induced
distress. Streptococcus spp. or Staphylocococcus spp. are
assumed if these cultures are negative. Lactamaseresistant antibiotics such as cefadroxil or cloxacillin are
generally effective, and most dogs respond immediately.
Brucellosis is treated with tetracycline and streptomycin
or a fluoroquinolone. Animals failing to improve within
5 days should be reassessed by lesion curettage and
­culture. Extended treatment may be necessary for up to
6 months.

ARTHRITIS
Definition/overview
Arthritis is an inflammatory disease of the joints characterized by cellular infiltrates and inflammatory changes
in the synovial membrane and synovial fluid. Clinical
manifestations are due to both persistent inflammatory
reactions resulting from deposition and phagocytosis
of immune complexes and release of damaging lysosomal enzymes within the joint. The cause and source of
immune complexes are unknown. Noninfective inflammatory arthropathies, including the immune-mediated
arthritides, are subdivided as erosive and nonerosive.
Nonerosive arthritides can be further subdivided as
follows:

●●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

Systemic lupus erythematosus.
Plasmacytic–lymphocytic synovitis.
Polyarthritis/polymyositis syndrome.
Idiopathic polyarthritis.
Drug-induced arthritis.
Hepatopathic arthritis.
Enteropathic arthritis.
Arthritis associated with malignant neoplasia.

Canine rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a progressive inflammatory polyarthropathy characterized by erosion and
destructive changes in the joint that involves both cellular and immune interactions. Characteristic signs are
generalized stiffness and shifting limb lameness accompanying systemic signs such as fever, lethargy, and inappetence. The most severely affected joints are the carpal,
tarsal, and interphalangeal joints, although the stifle,
elbow, and hip are commonly affected.
Polyarthritis is a specific disease entity in the young
Greyhound (Figures 15.64, 15.65) and mature cat. Chronic
progressive polyarthritis of cats is etiologically linked to
feline syncytium-forming virus, a common retrovirus

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

15.64

667

array of self-antigens and circulating immune complexes.
Although polyarthritis is a frequent feature of SLE in both
dogs and cats, it is more likely to be a predominant clinical disease in dogs, whereas cats tend to manifest other
systemic signs.

Etiology
Joints are common destinations for blood-borne microbial pathogens because the synovium and subchondral
bone are highly perfused. Additionally, the synovium is
a highly phagocytic organ, therefore a common site for
trapping blood-borne microbes and immune complexes.
Urinary tract and skin infections are less common in
cats than in dogs, and acquired heart valve disease is
quite rare; therefore, infectious arthritis is less common
in the cat. Organisms commonly involved in joint infections in dogs include Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus
spp., Erysipelothrix spp., Corynebacterium spp., coliforms,
Pasteurella spp., Salmonella spp., and, occasionally, B. canis.
In cats the usual offending organisms are Pasteurella multocida and hemolytic strains of E. coli.

Erosive arthritis
15.65

In RA, immune complexes in the synovium and synovial
fluid probably initiate the inflammatory reaction.

Nonerosive arthritis

Figures 15.64, 15.65 Gross specimen from a Greyhound with
polyarthritis. (15.64) The cartilage of the trochlear groove has
a rough surface, and the red and blue caste to the cartilage
identifies the subchondral bone beneath thin, translucent
cartilage. The synovium is hypertrophic. (15.65) The distal
humerus has a granular, rough cartilagenous surface with linear
score marks, cartilage cracks, and a deep erosion. (Courtesy the
late M.S. Bloomberg)

infection, and all cats with this disease are serologically
and virologically positive for this infection (high incidence of false-positive tests). Cats can also acquire a calicivirus-associated arthritis from natural infection and by
vaccination.
SLE is a multisystem autoimmune disease characterized by the formation of autoantibodies against a wide

K22463_C015.indd 667

Etiologically diverse, nonerosive, noninfectious arthritis occurs in both dogs and cats. Immune complexes in
the synovial membrane (resulting in a type III immune
reaction) are believed to result in joint disease. In idiopathic nondeforming arthritis the origin and nature of
the antigens in the complexes are unknown. The antigens
in SLE are of nuclear origin; the antigens in enteropathic
arthritis probably originate from the inflamed bowel;
and antigens in arthritis secondary to chronic infectious
disease or neoplasia originate from the offending microorganisms or from the tumor cells. The cause of SLE is
unknown.
Polyarthritis may be a manifestation of drug-induced
vasculitis. Fever and stiffness may be seen from the time
of first administration or as late as 3 weeks after drug
initiation. Skin rash may or may not occur concurrently.
Intolerance to trimethoprim–sulfa, penicillins, erythromycin, lincomycin, and cephalosporins is most common.
Drug withdrawal yields rapid resolution of signs.

Pathophysiology
Damaged joints are more likely to accommodate bloodborne pathogens. Larger dogs, older dogs, and proximal
rather than distal joints are more commonly affected.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

668

Diseases of specific organ systems

15.66

Prostatitis, cystitis, pyelonephritis, pyodermas, and oral
infections can all be accompanied by septicemia, leading
to arthritis. Complications include osteomyelitis, fibrous
or bony ankylosis, and secondary joint disease.

Erosive arthritis
Canine RA is more severe in the carpal and tarsal joints.
In the early stages the disease is often accompanied by
fever, malaise, anorexia, and lymphadenopathy, while
renal amyloidosis can be a complication of long-standing
disease. In the central region of the joint, pannus arising
from granulation tissue in the underlying marrow cavity causes cartilage destruction. Ankylosis in advanced
lesions is common in the intercarpal and intertarsal
joints.

Nonerosive arthritis
This joint disease tends to be cyclic, affecting one or
more joints. Biopsy of the synovial membranes shows
a nonvillous hyperplasia, sparse mononuclear cell
infiltrates, moderate neutrophil infiltrate, and fibrin
exudation.
In SLE the production of autoantibodies to nonorganspecific nuclear and cytoplasmic antigens and to cell- and
organ-specific antigens results from an immunoregulatory defect. Resultant immune complexes are deposited
in the glomerular basement membrane, synovial membrane, skin, blood vessels, and other sites. Complement
is activated by the immune complexes, leading to tissue
injury and inflammation. Furthermore, a direct cytotoxic
effect of autoantibodies against m
­ embrane-bound antigens contributes to tissue damage.

Clinical presentation
Animals with septic arthritis are usually painful on palpation, and redness as well as swelling may be observed
in the overlying skin and soft tissue. Fever is common.
Pointing abscessation and draining tracts may also be
present (Figure 15.66).

Figure 15.66 This patient had been treated with high doses of
prednisone for an earlier diagnosis of pemphigus vulgaris. The
immunosuppresive doses of this drug very likely predisposed
her to a monoarticular Salmonella spp. joint infection that
responded well to aspiration and intensive antimicrobial
treatment. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Nonerosive arthritis
The clinical and radiographic findings of polyarthritis
demonstrate the inflammatory nature of the disease and
simulate those of RA (narrowed joint space, periarticular
osteophytes, subchondral sclerosis, and capsular swelling). The history is one of cyclic fever, including anorexia,
lameness, stiffness, and malaise. Muscle atrophy may also
be noted.

Differential diagnosis
Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi), mycoplasmosis (often
associated with immunocompromise), rickettsiosis (polyarthritis is a prominent feature), ehrlichiosis (nonerosive
polyarthritis, always thrombocytopenia, triad of thrombocytopenia, fever, and lymphadenopathy).

Erosive arthritis
Neoplasia, immunologic cause.

Erosive arthritis

Nonerosive arthritis

Canine RA is a disease of mainly small dogs, manifesting
initially as a shifting lameness with soft tissue swelling
around involved joints. The disease is often accompanied by fever, malaise, anorexia, and lymphadenopathy
in the early stages, while renal amyloidosis can complicate long-standing disease. Excessive amounts of
synovial fluid may be present, which is generally discolored and turbid and yields a typically poor and friable
mucin clot.

Neoplasia, infectious disease, trauma.

K22463_C015.indd 668

Diagnosis
Synovial fluid from septic joints is often bloody and the
presence of toxic, ruptured, and degranulated neutrophils should suggest a bacterial infection. Although slight
periosteal proliferation of bone adjacent to the joint space
may be seen in late-stage arthritis, early stages are characterized by thickened synovial membrane, distended

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

joint capsule with displacement of adjacent fascial
planes, and widening of the joint space from joint effusion. Aspiration of the joint is necessary for a diagnosis
by cytology and culture.

Erosive arthritis
No single test can diagnose canine RA, including the
presence of rheumatoid factors in the blood. A prominent
radiographic lesion is the progressive destruction of subchondral bone in the more central areas and at the area of
synovium attachment (Figures 15.67, 15.68). A characteristic finding in canine RA is the presence in synovial fluid
of mononuclear cells containing IgG.

Nonerosive arthritis
Diagnosis is complicated by the cyclic nature of the disease; therefore, consideration must be made of a clinical history with antibiotic-nonresponsive cyclic fever,
malaise, anorexia, and lameness. Joint fluid with a neutrophilia of 5,000–100,000 cells/µl, yet sterile for bacteria, viruses, Mycoplasma, and Chlamydia is diagnostic.
Diagnosis of SLE is based on a positive ANA or lupus
erythematosus test, or both, and two major signs of polyarthritis, proteinuria, dermatitis, hemolytic anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, or polymyositis.

Management
Treatment of bacterial arthritis is dictated by identification of the causative organism and determination

15.67

15.68

669

of antibiotic sensitivities. Concurrent cultures of joint
fluid, serum, and urine may optimize isolation of the
pathogen(s). Generally, continued administration of
appropriate antibiotics for 2 weeks or more after the resolution of clinical signs is curative. Drainage of the suppurative exudate helps prevent lysosomal-caused joint
damage. The majority of cases of bacterial arthritis are
monoarticular.

Erosive arthritis
Treatment of RA with corticosteroids, a
­ nti-inflammatories,
and gold salts has been used, but the effect is merely palliative. If the condition is identified in the early stages,
it can be arrested with combination immunosuppressive
drug therapy, whereas in advanced conditions adjunctive
joint arthrodesis may be necessary.

Nonerosive arthritis
Glucocorticoids alone or in combination with immunosuppressive drugs provide remission; however, recurrence of illness is common when therapy is discontinued.
Treatment of SLE is directed at controlling the abnormal immune response and reducing the inflammation.
Corticosteroids are the foundation of treatment with
adjunctive cytotoxic immunosuppressive drugs for
additional improvement or when the patient is steroid
intolerant.
The most commonly encountered immune disorders affecting the skeletal system are SLE and immune-­
mediated polyarthropathy. When there is doubt as to
whether an arthritis is due to a tick-borne or immune
­etiology, it is rational to first treat with tetracycline or
doxycycline for at least 5 days before initiating treatment
with immunosuppressive therapy. A favorable response
is expected in 2–4 days if the arthritis is due to spirochetes or rickettsiae.

IATROGENIC DISORDERS
SYNOSTOSIS
Definition/overview

Figures 15.67, 15.68 Erosive polyarthritis in the carpus of
a 7-year-old male Whippet. Radiographic investigations of
patients with polyarthritis often reveal slightly large joints with
soft tissue swelling, periarticular osteophytes, osteolysis of the
distal portion of the radius and radial carpal bone, and loss of
joint space. (Courtesy A.M. Walker)

K22463_C015.indd 669

Synostosis of the radius and ulna is not a developmental
disease, but rather an iatrogenic restriction in the relative growth of the proximal ulna.

Etiology
A restriction in the relative growth of the proximal ulna
is usually associated with a callus spanning the radius
and ulna after inadequate fracture reduction.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

670

Diseases of specific organ systems

Pathophysiology

Management

Synostosis is usually associated with a bridging callus
following inadequate reduction of radial or ulnar fractures. The condition may also be caused by transfixation
of both bones with pins or screws during internal fixation
before skeletal maturity. Where considerable growth follows transfixation, a relative overgrowth of the proximal
radius occurs, with proximal displacement of the humeral
condyles and trochlear notch deformation.

Treatment of synostosis is based on the degree of malformation and the potential for further bone growth.
Surgery consists of removal of the growth constraint and
realignment of the elbow joint if appropriate. Bridging
callus can be resected and the defect filled with autogenous fat graft to prevent re-formation.

Clinical presentation

LEGG–CALVÉ–PERTHES DISEASE

Synostosis presents as an antebrachial deformity that
may also include luxation or subluxation of the elbow
joint.

Definition/overview

Differential diagnosis
Traumatic premature physeal closure.

Diagnosis
Radiographic finding is of bone bridging two synchronously growing bones, such as the radius and ulna in a
growing animal (Figure 15.69).
15.69

IDIOPATHIC

Legg–Calvé–Perthes disease (aseptic necrosis of the femoral head) is a disease of small, immature dogs seen
most commonly in Cairn Terriers, West Highland White
Terriers, Manchester Terriers, Miniature Pinschers, and
Poodles. Spontaneous degeneration of the femoral head
and neck (Figure 15.70) is followed by collapse of the
coxo­femoral joint and osteoarthritis.

Etiology
The cause of Perthes disease is unknown, although in the
Manchester Terrier a multifactorial inheritance pattern
with a high degree of heritability has been identified.
15.70
Trabecular fragmentation
Ischemic necrosis
of the femoral head

Greater
trochanter

Ischium

Figure 15.69 Synostosis of the radius and ulna in a young
German Shepherd Dog. The synostosis (within the diaphysis)
resulted in a relative overgrowth of the proximal radius
compared with the ulna, producing elbow incongruity and an
ununited anconeal process. (Courtesy the late M.S. Bloomberg)

K22463_C015.indd 670

Femur

Figure 15.70 Illustration of Legg–Calvé–Perthes disease
depicting collapse of the femoral head and neck areas.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

671

Pathophysiology

Etiology

A major part of the blood supply to the capital epiphysis of the femur becomes compromised and the ischemic
portion becomes necrotic. Necrosis of subchondral bone
leads to collapse and deformation of the femoral head
under normal weight bearing.

The etiology is unknown but may involve intramedullary
metaphyseal hemorrhage or local disturbance of bone
growth.

Clinical presentation
Perthes disease is usually unilateral and associated with
thigh muscle atrophy and pain in the hip.

Differential diagnosis
Luxating patella, coxofemoral luxation.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is confirmed by radiographic findings that
include radiolucent areas of the proximal femoral epiphysis (Figure 15.71), epiphyseal deformity, thickening of
the femoral neck, and increased width of the hip joint
space.

Pathophysiology
Lesions occur in metaphyses and adjacent diaphyses of
long bones. They are lined by thin membranes and contain serosanguineous fluid.

Clinical presentation
Affected dogs either have no clinical signs referable to
the lesion or have an associated lameness. Pain, swelling, and joint stiffness may be evident in the area of the
bone cyst and the cyst may predispose to a pathologic
fracture.

Differential diagnosis
Atypical bone neoplasia, fibrous dysplasia of bone, aneurysmal bone cyst.

Management

Diagnosis

Pathology is usually advanced by the time dogs are
presented with clinical signs. The surgical procedure of
femoral head and neck ostectomy is recommended as a
salvage procedure.

Radiographically, bone cysts appear as r­adiolucent
defects with cortical thinning (Figures 15.72, 15.73).
Periosteal reaction is absent and the lesion may
consist of several chambers. Fine needle aspira­
tion biopsy and ­
cytologic examination may prove
diagnostic.

BONE CYSTS
Definition/overview
Simple bone cysts are benign bone lesions occurring
only in large breed dogs. The distal radius and/or ulna is
affected most often.

15.72

15.73

15.71

Figure 15.71 Unilateral Perthes disease in a 6-month-old
female Fox Terrier presented for right hindlimb lameness. This
radiograph shows lysis of the femoral head (arrow).

K22463_C015.indd 671

Figures 15.72, 15.73 An aneurysmal bone cyst is seen in the
distal tibia of a mature male Sheltie. This is a rare neoplasm
and has produced bony lysis with minimal cortical or periosteal
reaction. The bone has expanded with a thin cortex, and a
pathologic fracture may ensue. (Courtesy S. Newell)

25/04/16 11:58 pm

672

Diseases of specific organ systems

15.74

Management
Drainage, curettage, autogenous grafting, and drilling
with multiple holes have all been used to treat bone cysts.
Left untreated, bone cysts have the potential for inciting
a pathologic fracture.

SECONDARY HYPERTROPHIC OSTEOPATHY
Definition/overview
Hypertrophic osteopathy (pulmonary osteoarthropathy,
hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy, hypertrophic
pulmonary osteopathy) is a secondary pathologic disease
frequently associated with some form of pulmonary disease and characterized by bilateral symmetrical swellings
in the distal extremities of all four limbs. It is a disease
of older dogs and the majority of bones in the limb may
show a diffuse periosteal reaction. Bone changes usually
begin distally and spread proximally.

Figure 15.74 This 11-year-old female spayed German Shepherd
Dog has hypertrophic osteopathy as a result of renal carcinoma
metastasizing to its chest. Note the distal appendigeal
swellings. (Courtesy M. Schaer)
15.75

Etiology
The cause is unknown and the disease is not restricted to
primary thoracic neoplasia.

Pathophysiology
This disease involves increased blood flow to the distal
extremities, then overgrowth of connective tissue and
subsequent osteoneogenesis. It is proposed that a neural
reflex originating in the thorax affects connective tissue
and periosteum of the limbs.

Clinical presentation
Diseased patients are stiff and reluctant to move. Limbs
are often painful, warm, and swollen (Figure 15.74).
Primary thoracic disease may manifest with cough,
abnormal lung sounds, dyspnea, or cardiac displacement.

Figure 15.75 Hypertrophic osteopathy was diagnosed in this
11-year-old female spayed German Shepherd Dog. All four
distal extremities were involved. The radiograph shows the
periosteal proliferation involving the distal foreleg (arrows).
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

Differential diagnosis

Management

Osteomyelitis, metastatic neoplasia.

Clinical signs typically resolve within 1–2 weeks of successful treatment for the primary cause, although resolution of the bony lesions may take months. Relief of
lameness may be gained with intrathoracic vagotomy on
the ipsilateral side to the bony lesion(s).

Diagnosis
Radiographic examination reveals early involvement of
the metacarpal and metatarsal bones (Figure 15.75), with
subsequent progression of periosteal reaction recognized
in more proximal long bones and joints. Radiographic
studies should include films of the thoracic and abdominal cavities to rule out pulmonary or abdominal (e.g. bladder rhabdomyosarcoma or liver adenocarcinoma) disease.
Skeletal recognition of hypertrophic osteopathy signals
other disease processes; therefore, interrogative diagnostics should follow if hypertrophic osteopathy is suspected.

K22463_C015.indd 672

MULTIPLE CARTILAGINOUS EXOSTOSES
Definition/overview
Multiple cartilaginous exostoses ­
(osteochondromatosis,
diaphyseal aclasis, hereditary ­
multiple exostoses),
reported in both dogs and cats, is a disease manifestation of endochondral ossification where partially ossified

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

673

protrusions arise from the cortical surfaces of bones.
­
The vertebrae, ribs, and long bones are most frequently
affected in dogs.

Differential diagnosis

Etiology

Radiographs reveal bony masses with a smooth thin shell
arising from the cortical surfaces of the appendicular or
axial skeleton (Figures 15.76, 15.77). The expanding exostoses may lead to skeletal deformation. Periodic radiographic evaluation is advised, with the consideration
that chronic lesions may transform to bone neoplasia.

The condition may be inherited as an autosomal ­dominant
trait in dogs. Differentiation to cartilage and bone of chondrocytes displaced from the metaphyseal growth plate is
believed to be the cause, and growth of the exostoses usually ceases with skeletal maturation. In the cat, feline leukemia virus has been associated with osteochondromas.
Transformation of cartilaginous exostoses into osteosarcoma and chondrosarcoma has been reported.

Pathophysiology
Protuberances consist of cancellous bone covered by a
surface of hyaline cartilage; they arise in the metaphyseal region of bones by endochondral ossification. As
growth continues, exostoses may finally become located
in the diaphysis.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs may include paresis due to spinal cord compression or pain from exostoses touching adjacent tissue.
Superficial exostoses may be palpated.
15.76

Neoplasia, fracture callus.

Diagnosis

Management
The extent of the lesion dictates treatment, and surgical
excision may be indicated if the lesion interferes with
function.

TOXICITY AND TRAUMA
LEAD POISONING
Definition/overview
Skeletal signs are usually absent with lead poisoning, but
in some affected young dogs radiography reveals ‘lead
lines’ in the bones.

Etiology
Plumbism is a disease caused by the ingestion of lead-­
containing materials, mainly paint.

Pathophysiology
Lead toxicity may result in gastrointestinal, neurologic, and
hematologic abnormalities. Radiographic ‘lead lines’ result
from accumulation of thick mineralized trabeculae at the
metaphyseal sites because of impaired osteoclastic activity.

Clinical presentation
Gastrointestinal signs of vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia,
and abdominal pain tend to predominate over central
nervous system (CNS) signs of lethargy, hysteria, seizures, and blindness.

Differential diagnosis
Hypervitaminosis D, hyperphosphatemia, bismuth toxicity.

Diagnosis

Figure 15.76 Cartilaginous exostoses observed on the medial
aspect of the distal radial metaphysis.

K22463_C015.indd 673

Radiographically, dense sclerotic ‘lead lines’ may be
seen in the metaphysis of long bones of immature dogs
(Figure 15.78). They are most apparent in the distal radius
and ulna. Chronic toxicity of vitamin D, ­phosphorus, or
bismuth can cause a similar radiographic lesion.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

674

Diseases of specific organ systems

15.77

a

b

c

d

Figures 15.77a–d These images depict a young mixed-breed dog with diffuse cartilaginous exostoses showing the external masses
and their radiographic appearance at various costochondral sites. (Courtesy H. Campbell and A. Alvarez)

Management
Skeletal signs may persist following treatment for
toxicity.

LUXATIONS
Definition/overview
The majority of joint luxations are traumatic, although
congenital luxations (Figure 15.79) do occur in both dogs
and cats. Femoropatellar luxation is frequently diagnosed in small dogs and occasionally in large dogs and
cats (Figures 15.80, 15.81). The condition varies from

K22463_C015.indd 674

complete, irreducible luxation of the patella and severe
lameness to mild instability without associated clinical
signs. Grading is made from 1–4 based on the severity of
the condition and clinical signs.

Etiology
In dogs the smaller breeds are more commonly affected
with congenital luxations owing to disruption of supporting joint structures or anatomic developmental failures.
With congenital absence of the patella within the femoral trochlear groove, the trochlear groove fails to develop,
resulting in a convex surface rather than a concave surface.

25/04/16 11:58 pm

Bone and joint disorders

15.78

Figure 15.78 ‘Lead lines’ seen in the metaphysis of an
immature dog. (Courtesy B.R. Jones)
15.80

675

15.79

Figure 15.79 Congenital joint luxations, such as this elbow,
often accompany other anomalies and are best treated by
‘salvage’ procedures.
15.81

Quadriceps

Quadriceps
tendon

Femur
Osteophytes

Patella

Medial
meniscus
Patellar
ligament
Tibia

Eroding
articular
cartilage
Fibular head
Lateral
meniscus
Fibula

Figures 15.80, 15.81 Illustration (15.80) and radiograph (15.81) of medial patella luxation, a common developmental anomaly in
small breed dogs.

K22463_C015.indd 675

25/04/16 11:58 pm

676

Diseases of specific organ systems

Pathophysiology
Agenesis of or an underdeveloped trochlear groove and
lack of supporting joint structures (such as the fabellopatellar ligament) allows easy luxation with joint extension. In doing so, the patella rides over the trochlear ridge
(medial more common than lateral). Articular cartilage
of both this ridge as well as the articular surface of the
patella may become eburnated to subchondral bone.
Ultimately, DJD leads to chronic osteoarthritis. In Grades 3
and 4, severe bony deformities may be present, including
marked internal tibial rotation and an S-shaped curve of
the distal femur and proximal tibia.

Clinical presentation
Grade 1 luxations are often incidental findings during
physical examination, where the patella can be manually
luxated. Grade 2 luxations present with a history of intermittent lameness, resolving spontaneously with patella
reduction. Owners often report that the dog suddenly
skips and carries the limb without apparent pain, flexes
and extends the joint several times, and is then able to
bear weight normally thereafter. In this case the animal
is allowing the patella to pop back into place by forcing
the limb into extension. With a Grade 3 luxation the
owner frequently reports that the dog shows a ‘crouched’
gait, since the dog often uses the limb in a semiflexed,
internally rotated position. Grade 4 is a nonreducible
luxation of the patella. The tibia is often rotated from
60 to 90 degrees r­ elative to the sagittal plane, and limb
disfiguration often accompanies abnormal gait. Patella
luxation often occurs bilaterally.

rewarding. Surgical methods include wedge section sulcoplasty, trochleoplasties, tibial tuberosity transposition,
and anti­
rotational techniques. Additionally, uncomplicated traumatic luxations most often carry a favorable
prognosis if treated promptly.

CRANIAL CRUCIATE LIGAMENT RUPTURE
Definition/overview
Rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament (Figure 15.82)
is frequently associated with hindlimb lameness in dogs
(especially large breeds of older, overweight females),
contributing to its recognition as the major cause of stifle
joint DJD. Injury leaves the animal with partial to complete instability of the joint (Figure 15.83).

Etiology
The majority of dogs with cranial cruciate ligament rupture have a chronic course rather than a history of distinct
trauma. Degeneration of the ligament may be caused by
aging, conformational abnormalities, immune-mediated
processes, and limb immobilization or loss of tone due to

15.82
Quadriceps
tendon

Femur

Differential diagnosis
Premature physeal closure, cranial cruciate ligament rupture, collateral ligament disruption, tibial tubercle avulsion fracture, patellar tendon rupture.

Lateral
fabella

Patella

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is most often apparent on physical examination, and it can be confirmed radiographically. Acute
lameness in a dog with chronic luxation is usually caused
by rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament, as cranial stifle support from the straight patella ligament is lacking.
Every small breed dog should be examined for patella
luxation.

Ruptured
cranial
cruciate
ligament

Patellar
ligament

Medial
meniscus

Tibial
tuberosity
Tibial crest

Fibula

Management
Surgical correction for congenital luxations is often disappointing due to the rapid anatomic changes in the growing dog and inevitable DJD. An exception is the condition
of luxating patella in the dog, where surgical correction is

K22463_C015.indd 676

Tibia

Figure 15.82 Illustration depicting a torn cranial cruciate
ligament.

25/04/16 11:59 pm

Bone and joint disorders

irregular use. Speculation suggests tibial plateau angle as
an etiologic factor.

Pathophysiology
Immune-mediated arthritis, lymphocytic–plasmacytic
synovitis, and septic arthritis may predispose the ligament to rupture. Cranial cruciate ligament strength deteriorates with aging, correlating with loss of fiber bundle
organization and metaplastic changes of cellular elements. Tears may occur in total or in part (approximately
30% of patients with stifle lameness) and osteoarthritis soon follows. Cranial cruciate ligament compromise
results in additional stress on the menisci, which frequently tear (>50% of patients), thus contributing to joint
osteoarthritis.

15.83

677

Clinical presentation
A common presenting sign is lameness of the hindlimb.
Acute traumatic ligament rupture is accompanied by
severe lameness and occasional nonweight-bearing.
Lameness subsides in 3–5 weeks as muscle atrophy progresses. In contrast, dogs with chronic disease have a
more insidious history of lameness, often intermittent
and exacerbated by exercise. Joint effusion is characteristic. Subtle weight shifts during standing and difficulty
rising can also suggest cruciate disease.

Differential diagnosis
Patellar luxation, meniscal injury, collateral ligament
compromise, hip dysplasia, skeletally immature dog
(have some degree of drawer sign), osteochondrosis of the
femoral condyle (Figure 15.84), neoplasia (synovial cell
sarcoma).

Diagnosis
High-quality radiographs often demonstrate joint
effusion and early signs of DJD (Figures 15.85–15.88).
Joint effusion may cause cranial displacement of the
15.84

Figure 15.83 Cranial cruciate ligament rupture is a common
presentation in clinical practice. In larger breeds of dog, surgical
stabilization is important in order to minimize the progression
of degenerative joint disease, demonstrated by osteophyte
deposition on the lateral aspect of this femoral condyle.
(Courtesy late M.S. Bloomberg)

K22463_C015.indd 677

Figure 15.84 Osteochondrosis dissecans of the femoral
condyle is a differential diagnosis for stifle lameness; however,
the condition does not present with cranial drawer motion.

25/04/16 11:59 pm

678

Diseases of specific organ systems

15.85

15.86

15.87

15.88

Figures 15.85–15.88 Radiographs showing the relative displacement of the fat pad in mild (15.85), moderate (15.86), and severe
(15.87) cranial cruciate ligament rupture, contrasted with the normal joint (15.88). (Courtesy B. Poteet)

infrapatellar fat pad, and osteophyte deposition is commonly observed on the distal pole of the patella in more
chronic cases. A bow-legged conformation, internal rotation of the tibia, or straight stifle increases suspicion of
cruciate disease. Thickening of the medial joint capsule
is characteristic of long-standing disease. Cranial drawer

K22463_C015.indd 678

motion is the hallmark of cruciate compromise and may
be detected by the cranial drawer test in either flexion or
extension. The tibial compression test is also diagnostic.
Partial tears of the craniomedial band of the ligament are
identified by palpation when cranial tibial displacement
is prevented by extension, but abnormal cranial drawer

25/04/16 11:59 pm

Bone and joint disorders

679

motion is evident in flexion. Due to periarticular fibrosis,
cranial drawer motion may be difficult to elicit in dogs
with chronic cruciate disease.

Contraindication

Management

●● Helpful in early disease detection.
●● Assists in chemotherapy and radiation therapy

Treatment options are influenced by the animal’s weight,
age, intended use, concurrent medical problems, economic considerations, and veterinary surgical training.
Dogs >15 kg body weight clearly benefit from surgical
therapy, while smaller dogs and cats are often treated
conservatively.
Conservative therapy is basically restriction of activity and use of NSAID analgesics. Leash walking and
swimming are appropriate exercise activities. The objectives of surgery are joint stabilization and minimizing
secondary DJD.
Hundreds of surgical methods of joint stabilization
have been described, suggesting that no one method is
ideal. At present, extracapsular stabilization, tibial plateau leveling osteotomy techniques, and tibial tuberosity
advancement are in favor. Irrespective of the technique
for stabilization, the joint must be inspected for meniscal damage. The frequency of meniscal damage increases
with chronicity and is as great as 80% in dogs with complete tears.

ADVANCED DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES
Increasingly sophisticated tests for the diagnosis of musculoskeletal disorders have become available over recent
years. Patient history and physical examination continue
to be the mainstay; however, arthroscopy, CT, and MRI are
becoming more integrated into our diagnostic offerings.
In addition, nuclear scintigraphy, ultrasonography, and
gait analysis are techniques for special interests.

Magnetic resonance imaging

Cases precluding general anesthesia.

Advantages
planning.

●● Noninvasive.
●● Higher contrast makes MR image quality superior to
that of reconstructed CT images.
Chemically maps body tissues.
Excellent detection of tissue hemorrhage and edema.
Allows image acquisition in any anatomic plane.
Paramagnetic contrast medium is very safe.
Allows detection of diskospondylitis before radiographic detection.
●● More accurate detection of tumor invasion to adjacent structures.
●● Absence of ionizing radiation.
●● High sensitivity in detecting abnormal bone marrow.

●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

Disadvantages
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

Highly motion sensitive.
Resolution inferior to that of CT images.
Cannot image body areas containing metal.
Limited availability.
Very expensive purchase and maintenance.

Computed tomography
The newest CT technology is spiral or helical scanning. In
CT the patient continuously moves through a gantry on
a motorized couch, while the x-ray tube rotates continually during the patient transit. This gives a volumetric
representation of the resulting pixels that allows for 3-D
reconstruction. Multiple slices (1–64) are taken per rotation. The technique is very fast, requiring approximately
10 seconds to do an entire canine thorax.

MRI offers excellent contrast and resolution, providing the ability to differentiate between adjacent joint
structures.

Indications

Indications

within the gantry.
●● Skull and CNS lesions most often assessed in veterinary patients.

Any soft tissue structure that can be placed within the
magnetic field. Common uses include:

●● CNS diseases of the brain and spinal cord; peripheral
nerve root diseases.
●● Orthopedic conditions of tendons, ligaments, joint
capsule, connective tissue, and bone marrow.
●● Nasal, oral, and auditory diseases.

K22463_C015.indd 679

●● Any body part can be assessed, provided it can fit

Contraindication
Cases precluding general anesthesia.

Advantages
●● Excellent resolution (down to 0.1 mm diameter) and
detail.

25/04/16 11:59 pm

680

Diseases of specific organ systems

●● Excellent image contrast, with 2,000 shades of gray.
●● Any areas of mineral and gas are detectable, where
they are unseen in conventional radiographs.
●● Noninvasive.

Disadvantages
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

General anesthesia required.
Limited availability.
Large doses of ionizing radiation.
Limited gantry size.
Expense.

Arthroscopy
Arthroscopy has revolutionized orthopedic surgery since
its veterinary acceptance in the 1970s. In the equine species, arthroscopy has replaced many arthrotomies. A characteristic value of arthroscopy is that this procedure can
serve as both a diagnostic and treatment technique at the
same time. The technique is implemented as an adjunct
to a thorough orthopedic and radiographic examination.

Advantages
●● Is routinely available at surgical referral centers.
●● Offers a minimally invasive technique, with few
complications.
●● Provides a detailed view and magnification of
intra-articular structures and lesions.

●● Is associated with a low frequency of complications,
the most common of which is perhaps iatrogenic cartilage damage associated with instrument insertion
and manipulation.

FURTHER READING
Barr FJ, Kirberger RM (2006) BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline
Musculoskeletal Imaging. British Small Animal Veterinary
Association, Gloucester.
Houlton JEF, Cook JL, Innes JF et al. (2006) (eds.) BSAVA Manual
of Canine and Feline Musculoskeletal Disorders. British Small
Animal Veterinary Association, Gloucester.
Johnston SA (1997) Osteoarthritis. Joint anatomy, physiology, and pathobiology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
27(4):699–723.
Levine D, Millis DL, Marcellin-Little DJ et al. (2005) Introduction
to veterinary physical rehabilitation. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Practice 35(6):1247–1254.
Renberg WC, Roush JD (2001) Lameness. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 33(1).
Safra N, Johnson EG, Lit L et al. (2013) Clinical mainifestations, response to treatment, and clinical outcome for
Weimaraners with hypertrophic osteodystrophy. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 242:1260–1266
Scott HW, McLaughlin R (2007) Feline Orthopedics. Manson
Publishing, London.

Disadvantages
●● Requires a substantial financial investment and long
learning curve.

●● Has limited application in the smaller breeds.

K22463_C015.indd 680

26/04/16 1:23 am

681

Chapter 16
Hematologic disorders
Katie M. Boes & Rose E. Raskin

INTRODUCTION

16.1

Blood disorders occur commonly in dogs and cats, often
secondary to systemic disease or injury. History, physical
examination, and laboratory diagnostic tests are crucial
for recognition and complete characterization of these
disorders. Complete blood count (CBC) and bone mar­
row evaluation are the laboratory diagnostic tests most
often used.

ERYTHROCYTE DISORDERS
(NON-NEOPLASTIC)
ANEMIA

Figure 16.1 Marked pallor. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Definition/overview
Anemia is one of the most frequent hematologic abnor­
malities encountered in practice. It is not a disease, but
rather the reflection of a disease state.

16.2

Etiology
The three general causes of anemia are erythrocyte loss
(hemorrhage), lysis (hemolysis), and decreased produc­
tion (hypoplasia or aplasia).

Pathophysiology
A decreased red blood cell (RBC) mass leads to insuf­
ficient oxygen delivery to vital organs, and subsequent
decreased aerobic metabolism, energy production, and
tissue function. Cellular and tissue injury can occur with
more severe or prolonged anemia.

Clinical presentation
Common historical signs of anemia include lethargy,
depression, weakness, exercise intolerance, and hypo­
rexia. Recumbency, seizures, syncope, and coma may
occur with severe anemia. Pale mucous membranes are
a common physical examination finding (Figure 16.1).
With moderate to severe anemia, heart murmur, tachy­
cardia, tachypnea, and dyspnea may be appreciated.
Icterus (Figure 16.2) may occur with hemolytic anemia or

K22463_C016.indd 681

Figure 16.2 Icterus demonstrated by yellow skin discoloration.
(Courtesy J. Thompson)

internal hemorrhage, whereas intravascular hemolytic
anemia can cause red plasma (hemolysis, Figure 16.3)
and urine (hemoglobinuria) in addition to icterus.
Hemorrhage into the thoracic and abdominal cavities
may cause dyspnea and abdominal enlargment, respec­
tively. Occasionally, anemia may be discovered during
routine blood evaluation, even when the animal appears
clinically normal. Sedentary animals, especially cats,
often have a moderate anemia that goes unnoticed for

25/04/16 11:15 pm

682

Diseases of specific organ systems

16.3

The plasma of the spun microhematocrit tube should
be evaluated for lipemia, hemolysis, or icterus, since this
may help identify the cause of the anemia, disease states,
or potential biochemical interferences. The plasma pro­
tein or total solids concentration should be determined
by refractometer.
The Hct may be calculated from the mean cell volume
(MCV) and RBC by a hematology analyzer (Equation 1), or
it may be measured by conductivity by some blood gas
instruments. The Hct is similar to the PCV, except the PCV
is typically greater than the Hct by 1–3 percentage units
due to trapped plasma between RBCs in the microhema­
tocrit tube. The calculated Hct is inaccurate when the MCV
or RBC results are erroneous, whereas the conductivity
Hct may be affected by factors that alter the electrical
conductivity of blood, such as excessive EDTA, excessive
or deficient blood particles (e.g. leukocytosis, thrombocy­
tosis, hyperproteinemia, or hypoproteinemia), or electro­
lyte disturbances.

Figure 16.3 Red plasma and PCV of 0.14 l/l
(14%) in an animal with intravascular hemolysis.

long periods of time. Splenomegaly and hepatomegaly
­frequently occur due to increased extravascular hemoly­
sis or extramedullary hematopoiesis.

Differential diagnosis
Trauma with blood loss, platelet or clotting factor defi­
ciency, hemoparasitism, infectious diseases, neopla­
sia, immune-mediated disease, drug or plant toxicosis,
chronic organ disease, inflammation.

Diagnosis
A complete history and physical examination should
evaluate for trauma or surgery, sites of blood loss, drug
or toxin exposure, concurrent disease, and duration of
disease.

Complete blood count
Anemia is identified by a decreased packed cell volume
(PCV), hematocrit (Hct), RBC count, or hemoglobin (Hgb)
concentration. The PCV is the most accurate and least
expensive method of documenting anemia. It is performed
by centrifuging a microhematocrit tube filled with antico­
agulated whole blood for 5 minutes at 12,000–15,000 g, and
then measuring the RBC volume as a percentage of the total
blood volume. Erroneous PCV results may occur with inad­
equate mixing of blood before filling the microhematocrit
tubes, excessive EDTA, and inadequate centrifugation.

K22463_C016.indd 682

Equation 1: Hct = MCV × RBC count/10
Example: MCV = 50 fl; RBC count = 8.00 × 106/μl
Hct (%) = 50 × 8.00/10 = 40
Hgb concentration is typically determined using a
spectrophotometer by the cyanmethemoglobin method
or a cyanide-free method. Artifactual increases may
occur with gross lipemia, excessive Heinz bodies, or some
monoclonal gammopathies.
The RBC count is usually performed by an automated
cell counter or, less commonly, by a hemocytometer. The
RBC count may be inaccurate with inadequate mixing of
the sample, clots in the sample, in-vitro hemolysis, RBC
agglutination, and marked thrombocytosis.
The mean cell hemoglobin (MCH) and mean cell hemo­
globin concentration (MCHC) are calculated RBC indices
(Equations 2 and 3) that help classify the type of anemia
as normochromic (normal MCH and MCHC) or hypochro­
mic (decreased MCH and MCHC). When these values are
discrepant, MCHC is the preferred index for interpreta­
tion. Decreased values reflect the presence of young RBCs
(reticulocytes) or abnormal hemoglobinization (e.g. iron
deficiency). Increased levels occur artifactually from
hemolysis, lipemia, Heinz bodies, or paraproteins.
MCV may be determined directly by automated cell
counters or calculated (Equation 4). MCV reflects RBC size
and may be categorized as macrocytic (increased MCV),
microcytic (decreased MCV), or normocytic (normal MCV).
An increased MCV may occur with underfilled EDTA tubes,
RBC regeneration, feline leukemia virus (FeLV) infec­
tion, breed variation (Toy and Miniature Poodle dogs),

25/04/16 11:15 pm

Hematologic disorders

RBC agglutination, and hyperosmolarity. Decreased MCVs
are observed with iron deficiency, liver disease, porto­
systemic shunts, breed variation (Akita and Shiba dogs),
young animals, and hypo-osmolarity.
Equation 2: MCH = Hgb × 10/RBC count
Equation 3: MCHC = Hgb × 100/Hct
Equation 4: MCV = Hct x 10/RBC count
Example: Hgb = 12.0 g/dl; RBC count = 7.00 × 106/μl;
Hct = 30%
MCH (pg) = 12.0 × 10/7.00 = 17.1
MCHC (g/dl) = 12.0 × 100/30 = 40
MCV (fl) = 30 × 10/7.00 = 43
Blood smear evaluation of RBCs involves qualification
of changes in size (anisocytosis), shape (poikilocytosis),
and color (chromasia). The presence of abnormal red cells
(e.g. nucleated precursors, basophilic stippling, infectious
parasites, and Heinz bodies) or red cell arrangement (e.g.
agglutination and rouleaux) should be noted.

683

from 0% to 0.4% (0–30,000/µl) and punctate reticulocytes
are <5% (<500,000/µl). Aggregated reticulocytes repre­
sent the most active or recent form of regeneration in the
dog and cat, and are identified as polychromatophils in
Romanowsky-stained smears. Punctate reticulocytes in
cats do not stain as polychromatophilic cells and they
represent past regeneration that occurred in the prior
2–4 weeks.
Note: The absolute reticulocyte count is the best
method to identify regeneration. In the absence of
a ­
reticulocyte count, increased polychromasia on a
Romanowsky-stained blood smear is the only RBC
morphology that is specific for regeneration. Within
the monolayer, dogs normally have 0–1 polychro­
matophils/100× objective field, and cats have no to rare
polychromatophils/100× objective field. Greater numbers
reflect regeneration.
16.4

Reticulocyte counts
Reticulocytes are young RBCs that contain more RNA and
less Hgb than mature RBCs. Most reticulocytes develop
into mature RBCs in the bone marrow, and are subse­
quently released into peripheral circulation. However,
low numbers of reticulocytes are present in blood under
normal hematologic conditions. Increased numbers of
reticulocytes in blood (reticulocytosis) are seen with
tissue hypoxia, and the presence or absence of reticulo­
cytosis classifies the anemia as regenerative or nonregen­
erative, respectively.
Reticulocyte counts may be determined by automated
hematology analyzers or by manual methods. For man­
ual reticulocyte count quantification, equal volumes of
blood and 0.5% new methylene blue stain are incubated
together for 15–20 minutes at room temperature. Then,
a routine blood smear is made and allowed to dry. The
numbers of aggregated (dogs and cats) and punctate
(cats) forms per 1,000 erythrocytes are counted to deter­
mine the reticulocyte percentage (Retic%) (Figures 16.4,
16.5). The absolute reticulocyte count (Retic#) is the more
accurate reflection of RBC regeneration, and is calculated
from the Retic% and RBC count (Equation 5).

Figure 16.4 New methylene blue-stained blood smear from a
dog, showing five aggregated reticulocytes.

16.5

Equation 5: Retic# = RBC count × Retic% × 10,000
Example: RBC count = 3.00 × 106/μl; Retic% = 3.5%
Retic# (/μl) = 3.00 × 3.5 × 10,000 = 105,000
Dogs normally have 0–1% reticulocytes (0–80,000/µl)
in blood. In normal cats, aggregated reticulocytes range

K22463_C016.indd 683

Figure 16.5 Feline aggregated (arrows) and punctate
(arrowheads) reticulocytes demonstrated by new methylene
blue stain.

25/04/16 11:15 pm

684

Diseases of specific organ systems

When the RBC count is not available, the PCV may be
used to calculate the corrected reticulocyte percentage
(CRP, Equation 6). A CRP value >1% indicates increased
RBC regeneration. Once initiated in the bone marrow,
regeneration may take at least 3 days before reticulocytes
appear in circulation.
Equation 6: CRP = Retic% × (patient’s Hct)/
(average Hct for species)
Example (dog): Retic% = 3.5%; patient’s Hct = 20;
­average Hct for dogs = 45%
CRP (%) = 3.5 x 20/45 = 1.6
Example (cat): Retic% = 2.5%; patient’s Hct = 20;
average Hct for cats = 35%
CRP (%) = 2.5 x 20/35 = 1.4

Biochemical profiles

infectious myelitis, and cancer staging. This is a sterile
procedure often performed with only local anesthesia;
however, sedation with reversible or general anesthesia
may be used.
Sites frequently used in dogs include the dorsal ilium,
humerus (best for obese animals), and femur (small dogs
or puppies). Sites frequently used in cats include the
humerus, femur, and dorsal ilium by transilial or perpen­
dicular approach (Figures 16.6–16.8). Specialized needles
are preferred for the collection process and the proce­
dures are well established.

Classifying the general cause of anemia
The above tests help classify the cause of anemia as
hemorrhage, hemolysis, or decreased RBC production
(Table 16.2).

Biochemical profiles may reveal disease that can affect
the ability to regenerate erythrocytes, especially diseases
of the liver and kidney.

16.6

Fecal examination and urinalysis
These tests are performed to determine sources of blood
loss and function of the kidney.
Figure 16.6 Bone marrow
sites for aspiration and core
biopsy using the dorsal
crest of the ilium and the
proximal femur. The parallel
approach to the ilium is
best for aspiration biopsy
in medium or large sized
breeds having an easily
palpable crest protuberance.

Bone marrow evaluation
Bone marrow evaluation (Table 16.1) is best performed
when both aspirate and core biopsies are taken together,
since each provides different information. Results must
always be compared with a recent CBC (within 24 hours) to
determine the current status of regeneration. Indications
for bone marrow evaluation include persistent cyto­
penia(s) of unknown etiology, diagnosing leukemia or
Table 16.1 Bone marrow aspiration and core biopsy procedures for the dog and cat.
Aspiration biopsy

Core biopsy

Equipment:
•• Illinois sternal disposable needle, 15–18 G, 2.5–5 cm
(1–2 inches) long (Cardinal Health, Dublin, OH)
Procedure:
•• Pass the needle with its stylet a few millimeters into the
bone until it is firmly embedded
•• Place a 12 ml syringe coated with 5% EDTA solution onto the
biopsy needle and collect 1–2 ml of bloody material
•• Place the marrow material into a plastic Petri dish and pick
up the glistening particles with a pipette
•• Gently express this material out of the tube onto a glass
slide
•• Make a squash preparation by laying a second slide on the
first and pulling them horizontally apart

Equipment:
•• Jamshidi aspiration/biopsy disposable needle, 11–13 G,
5–10 cm (2–4 inches) long (Cardinal Health, Dublin, OH)
Procedure:
•• Pass the needle with stylet through the skin and subcutaneous tissues
•• Remove the stylet while advancing the needle 0.5–1.5 cm
into the bone, depending on the size of the animal
•• Twist the instrument sharply to cut the sample and
­withdraw the needle slowly
•• Remove the core sample and roll it onto a glass slide for
cytologic examination; following this, place sample in 10%
buffered formalin for histologic fixation

K22463_C016.indd 684

25/04/16 11:15 pm

Hematologic disorders

16.7

Figure 16.7
Bone marrow
site for the
transilial
approach for
core biopsy
in a cat or
small dog.

16.8

Figure 16.8
Bone marrow
site for
aspiration
and core
biopsy using
the anterior
lateral side of
the proximal
humerus. This
site is especially
helpful in obese
animals.

685

Historical and physical support for hemorrhage
includes a history of trauma or surgery or the observa­
tion of bleeding wounds, petechiae, ecchymoses, heavy
external or intestinal parasitism, epistaxis, hemopty­
sis, melena, hematochezia, hemorrhagic effusions, or
hematuria. Hemorrhage typically causes regenerative
anemia, but nonregenerative anemia may occur with
peracute hemorrhage prior to the release of reticulo­
cytes from the bone marrow (preregenerative anemia),
or with chronic external blood loss leading to iron
deficiency. Proportionate decreases in albumin and
globulin concentrations, termed panhypoproteinemia,
support hemorrhage as the cause of anemia since pro­
teins are also lost with extravasation of whole blood. An
increased urea nitrogen concentration relative to creat­
inine concentration can occur with excessive intestinal
absorption of protein due to gastric or small intestinal
hemorrhage.
Excessive destruction of mature RBCs results in regen­
erative anemia unless the hemolysis is peracute, and
therefore preregenerative. Support for hemolysis as the
cause of anemia includes yellow plasma or mucous mem­
branes (icterus), red plasma (hemolysis), and hemoglobin
in the urine (hemoglobinuria). Since icterus may occur
with other disease processes (e.g. liver disease or obstruc­
tional cholestasis), it is not pathognomonic for hemoly­
sis. Panhypoproteinemia is not an expected finding of
hemolysis.
Decreased RBC production causes nonregenerative
anemia. Therefore, reticulocyte counts are typically
within normal limits or decreased. Icterus or hemoly­
sis does not typically occur, but icterus may occur with
nonregenerative immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
(IMHA) or if there is concurrent liver or cholestatic dis­
ease. Nonregenerative anemia is not directly linked with
panhypoproteinemia.

Table 16.2 Indicators of general categories of anemia.
Blood loss

Hemolysis

Clinical

Hemorrhage; trauma

Icteric plasma and mucous
membranes; red plasma

CBC

Reticulocytosis; increased polychromasia;
decreased plasma proteins

Reticulocytosis, increased
polychromasia; increased MCHC

Chemistry

Increased BUN vs. creatinine;
panhypoproteinemia; hyperbilirubinemia
(internal hemorrhage)

Hyperbilirubinemia

Urinalysis

Red urine with RBCs in sediment;
bilirubinuria (internal hemorrhage)

Golden-orange urine; red urine
without RBCs in sediment;
bilirubinuria

K22463_C016.indd 685

Decreased production

No reticulocytosis, no
polychromasia; other cytopenias

25/04/16 11:15 pm

686

Diseases of specific organ systems

Management
Principles of transfusion therapy
Blood transfusion depends on the etiology, severity, and
chronicity of the anemia. Whole blood or packed RBCs
(RBCs without plasma) may be administered when the
anemia is not caused by a coagulopathy. If a coagulopa­
thy is causing the anemia, then whole blood or plasma
should be given, if warranted (see Chapter 17: Disorders
of hemostasis). Rapid decreases in RBC mass can cause
more severe clinical signs and patient outcomes since
physiologic compensation mechanisms are more easily
overwhelmed. However, slow daily decreases in PCV of
0.01–0.03 l/l (1–3%) may not cause clinical signs of dys­
pnea or weakness. Generally, replacement therapy may
not be warranted until the PCV drops below 0.20–0.25 l/l
(20–25%), since compensatory mechanisms begin to fail
at lower RBC masses. When the PCV reaches 0.10 l/l (10%),
transfusion therapy becomes imperative.
Pretransfusion testing should be performed to ensure
efficacy of treatment and patient safety. Pretransfusion
compatibility testing includes blood typing and
cross-matching. Blood typing detects antigen on the cell
surface, while cross-matching detects the presence of
antibody on the cell surface.
Dogs do not have naturally occurring RBC alloantibod­
ies. Therefore, dogs develop alloimmune RBC antibodies
when they are exposed to foreign RBCs during pregnancy,
parturition, or blood transfusion. At least 12 dog eryth­
rocyte antigens (DEAs) have been identified, but DEAs
1.1, 1.2, 4, 7, and Dal are most likely to induce alloanti­
body formation. Blood typing and cross-matching are
not essential prior to a nonparous patient’s first blood
transfusion, but administering DEA 1.1-positive blood to
a DEA 1.1-­negative dog will reduce the blood donor pool if

subsequent blood transfusions are needed. Alloantibodies
develop 4 days after the first transfusion; therefore, a
cross-match should be performed if additional transfu­
sions are given after this timeframe.
Cats have three major RBC types: type A, type B, and
type AB. Type A is the most prevalent blood type in the
US, with type B cats more commonly identified in Europe
and Australia; type AB cats are rare. Exotic breeds of cats,
including Abyssinians, Birmans, Persians, Himalayans,
and Rexes, have an increased prevalence of type B blood.
RBC alloantibodies occur naturally in cats, except in
type AB cats, which do not produce A or B alloantibod­
ies. At a minimum, all cats should be blood typed prior
to their first blood transfusion to ensure they receive
appropriate type A or type B blood. However, only typing
for A and B antigens carries a slight risk of not identi­
fying other natural occurring alloantibodies, such as the
recently identified Mik antigen. If blood typing is not
available, a cross-match should be performed. Similar
to dogs, cross-matching should be performed if blood is
administered 4 or more days after the first transfusion.
During cross-match testing, incompatibility between
patient and donor manifests itself as hemolysis and/or
agglutination in either the major or minor cross-matches
(Table 16.3). If the donor autocontrol displays either hemo­
lysis or agglutination, it is best not to use it. If the donor
autocontrol displays these changes, the major and minor
cross-match results will be difficult, if not impossible, to
interpret. A major cross-match incompatibility indicates
that the donor’s blood may not be used. However, incom­
patibility in the minor cross-match may not prevent use
of the donor’s blood if a better match cannot be found. The
decision is up to the clinician, and the blood transfusion
should be carefully monitored.

Table 16.3 Standard cross-matching procedures used to detect transfusion incompatibility.
•• Collect from each patient and donor, 1 tube for serum (red top) and 1 tube for cells (purple top)
•• Wash cells 3 times in 0.9% saline
•• Add 4.8 ml saline to 0.2 ml RBCs to make a 4% cell suspension
•• Red cells and serum mixtures are:
○○ Major cross-match: donor RBCs (0.1 ml or 2 drops) + patient serum (0.1 ml or 2 drops)
○○ Minor cross-match: patient RBCs (0.1 ml or 2 drops) + donor serum (0.1 ml or 2 drops)
○○ Donor control: donor cells (0.1 ml or 2 drops) + donor serum (0.1 ml or 2 drops)
○○ Patient control: patient cells (0.1 ml or 2 drops) + patient serum (0.1 ml or 2 drops)
•• Incubate each mixture in a glass tube for 15 minutes at 37°C (98.6°F) to evaluate compatibility. Additional incubations at room
temperature and 4°C (39.2°F) may be performed to identify cold agglutinins and hemolysins
•• Centrifuge tubes at 280 g for 1 minute
•• Examine the supernatant for hemolysis in all cross-matches, including autocontrols. Report the presence of hemolysis relative
to autocontrols
•• Examine cell suspension for gross and microscopic agglutination in all cross-matches, including autocontrols. Agglutination is
defined as the collection of three or more RBCs. Report the presence of agglutination relative to autocontrols

K22463_C016.indd 686

25/04/16 11:15 pm

Hematologic disorders

Efficacy of the blood transfusion is assessed by mea­
suring the Hct, PCV, or Hgb prior to and after the admin­
istration of whole blood or packed RBCs. Intermittently
measuring the patient’s vital signs (e.g. body temperature,
heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood pressure) during
and several hours after a transfusion promotes early
identification of transfusion-related adverse events. The
transfusion should be discontinued if severe signs are
noted (e.g. urticaria, vomiting, diarrhea, or collapse).

Blood transfusion
The goal of transfusion therapy is to provide the anemic
patient with sufficient oxygen-carrying particles (eryth­
rocytes or oxyglobin solution) to alleviate clinical signs
of hypoxia, but with as little product as necessary so as
to reduce the likelihood of transfusion reactions and vol­
ume overload. Smaller dosages may be needed in chronic
anemias due to the presence of physiologic compensation
and internal blood loss anemia, since hemorrhaged RBCs
will re-enter the circulation (approximately 50% over
24 hours). Massive transfusions (e.g. 90 ml/kg in 24 hours
or 45 ml/kg in 3 hours in the dog) may be required for
acute, marked decreases in RBCs, such as acute external
hemorrhage. In these cases, the patient should be moni­
tored for hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia secondary
to citrate anticoagulant administration.
In general, the optimal component for normovolemic
patients (e.g. normovolemic blood loss anemia, anemia
of chronic kidney disease, anemia of bone marrow fail­
ure, and hemolytic anemia) is packed RBCs. Hypovolemic
blood loss anemia is best treated with packed RBCs and
hypertonic fluids (e.g. crystalloid or colloid solutions) in
separate lines and into different veins. However, whole
blood or oxyglobin solution are alternate components that
can be given to any patient, and product availability often
dictates which component will be administered. Initial
dosages are 6–10 ml packed RBCs/kg, 10–15 ml packed
RBCs in additive solution/kg, or 10–20 ml whole blood/kg.
Appropriate filters and administration sets must be
used to retain clotted blood or debris. The blood does not
need to be warmed prior to administration. For the first
30 minutes, the initial rate of administration should be
kept slow (e.g. 0.25 ml/kg) in order to observe any incom­
patibility reactions. After initial transfusion, normovole­
mic patients can receive rates of 10–20 ml/kg/hour, but
hypovolemic patients with acute anemia can receive
rates up to 60 ml/kg/hour. Slow transfusion rates are
recommended for patients with cardiac disease, but any
transfusion should be given within 4 hours of initiating
treatment. If not initially hemolyzed, transfused RBCs
have a half-life of approximately 21–35 days.

K22463_C016.indd 687

687

REGENERATIVE ANEMIA
Regenerative anemia is anemia with increased numbers
of reticulocytes in the blood. It identifies the cause of the
anemia as RBC loss from blood vessels or RBC destruc­
tion. Depending on the severity of hemorrhage or hemo­
lysis, the regenerative response may be mild to strong.
In some cases, the anemia may occur so rapidly that the
animal may have too little time to mount a regenerative
response by the time the condition is recognized. A period
of 2–3 days is necessary for RBC maturation, once the
stimulation from hypoxia has occurred. Therefore, ane­
mia due to hemorrhage or hemolysis may appear nonre­
generative during this preregenerative phase. Sequential
CBCs can help differentiate preregenerative anemia from
nonregenerative anemia.

acute blood loss
Definition/overview
Whole blood is lost from the blood vessels. Hemorrhage
may be internal (e.g. abdominal, thoracic, or pericardial
cavities) or external (e.g. gastrointestinal [GI] tract or
environment).

Etiology
Common causes of blood loss include trauma, surgery,
external and internal parasitism, gastric ulcers, tumors of
the GI and urinary systems, splenic rupture, coagulation
abnormalities, marked thrombocytopenia, and phlebot­
omy (Table 16.4).

Pathophysiology
Large volumes of blood must be lost before appreciable
changes occur in the number of erythrocytes or the PCV.
The immediate loss of blood results in little or no change
to the PCV, owing to the concurrent and proportional loss
of RBCs and plasma. In an attempt to increase blood vol­
ume and pressure, the body redistributes fluid from the
extravascular space to the intravascular space over the
course of several hours to days. This results in a lowered
Table 16.4 Common causes of blood loss.
Trauma
Surgery
External and internal parasitism
Gastric ulcers
Tumors of the gastrointestinal and urinary systems
Splenic rupture
Coagulation abnormalities

25/04/16 11:15 pm

688

Diseases of specific organ systems

PCV and plasma protein concentration. Physiologic alter­
ations to acute blood loss include preservation of perfu­
sion of the brain, heart, and viscera by restricting blood
flow to less essential tissues such as the skin.

floatation, fecal occult blood, buccal mucosal bleeding
time and coagulation testing, total protein, urinalysis,
abdominal and thoracic imaging, body cavity fluid anal­
ysis, and endoscopy.

Clinical presentation

Management

Animals with acute blood loss of >20% of normal blood
volume have pale, dry mucous membranes and decreased
capillary refill time (CRT). This is the result of several
hemodynamic mechanisms directing blood away from
less essential tissue to preserve perfusion of important
organs such as the brain and heart. Animals usually pres­
ent with cardiovascular signs such as tachycardia, as the
heart compensates in an attempt to maintain cardiac out­
put. Blood losses of 30–40% of normal blood volume cause
decreased cardiac output and hypotension, and cardio­
vascular collapse occurs. Such animals are usually immo­
bile and have a rapid pulse and cold extremities and skin.
Blood losses of >50% normal blood volume cause shock
and death within hours.

Blood or oxyglobin solution transfusions should be
­considered when acute hemorrhage causes the PCV to
drop to 0.2–0.25 l/l (20–25%) in the dog or cat. The cause of
the hemorrhage should be appropriately treated.

hemolytic anemia
Hemolytic anemia is most commonly a result of
immune-mediated destruction, RBC parasites, oxidant-­
induced injury, or mechanical fragmentation (microan­
giopathy). Blood smear evaluation has a critical role in
differentiating the causes of hemolysis (Table 16.5), and
therefore the appropriate disease treatment.

Differential diagnosis

primary (idiopathic) immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia

Disorders of hemostasis, hemolytic conditions, and intra­
cavitary hemorrhage.

Definition/overview
IMHA is antibody-mediated RBC destruction. It is sub­
classified into primary (idiopathic) IMHA and secondary
IMHA. The primary form is characterized by a dysregu­
lated immune system that produces antibodies against
unaltered RBC surface antigens in the absence of an iden­
tifiable cause. Secondary IMHA may occur as a sequela to
infection, drugs, or neoplasms that typically alter RBC

Diagnosis
A CBC, with assessment of erythrocyte morphology,
­reticulocyte count, and calculation of red cell indices,
are the most important laboratory data to obtain from
anemic animals. Other diagnostic tests include physi­
cal examination for external wounds or parasites, fecal

Table 16.5 Potential erythrocyte abnormalities with main causes of hemolysis.
Immune-mediated

Infectious

Oxidant-induced

Microangiopathy

Ghost cells

4

4

4

4

Agglutination

4

4

Spherocytes*

4

4

RBC parasites

4

Heinz bodies

4

Eccentrocytes

4

Methemoglobinemia

4

Schistocytes

4

Acanthocytes

4

Keratocytes

4

*Spherocytes are difficult to identify in cats since their red cells normally lack central pallor.

K22463_C016.indd 688

25/04/16 11:15 pm

Hematologic disorders

surface antigens. Primary IMHA is the most common
form of IMHA in dogs, but the majority of feline IMHAs
are secondary.

Etiology
The etiology of primary IMHA is unknown, but regulatory
T-lymphocyte dysfunction, defects in central or periph­
eral tolerance, cross-reactivity with self- and foreign
antigens, and exposure of hidden antigens have been
implicated. It may be associated with systemic lupus ery­
thematosus (SLE) or other autoimmune disease.

Pathophysiology
Antibodies of the IgG subclass are most commonly impli­
cated in canine IMHA, but IgM antibodies and complement
may also contribute to disease. The variable fragment of
the antibody binds the RBC surface antigen, marking it
for removal by the monocyte–macrophage system, or
activating the classical complement pathway. Splenic
macrophages, and to a lesser degree hepatic macro­
phages (Kupffer cells), bind the constant fragment of the
RBC-bound antibody. The macrophages either completely
phagocytize the RBC and remove it from circulation, or
only phagocytize a part of the RBC membrane. Completely
phagocytized RBCs are digested, and the hemoglobin is
converted to bilirubin, which results in clinical icterus
and hyperbilirubinemia. The partially phagocytized RBC
remains in circulation, but with an abnormal RBC mor­
phology (spherocyte). Therefore, spherocytes on a blood
smear indicate RBC lysis by macrophages (extravascular
hemolysis). Activation of the classical complement path­
way can lead to membrane attack complex formation and
subsequent RBC lysis within the blood vessel (intravas­
cular hemolysis). The lysed RBC releases its intracellular
contents into the plasma, which results in hemoglobin­
emia and subsequent hemoglobinuria if the haptoglobin
savage system is overwhelmed. The lysed RBC mem­
branes can be visualized on a blood smear as ghost cells.
In-vivo agglutination of RBCs occurs when IgM or high
titers of IgG molecules cause bridging of RBCs.
Common causes of death in canine IMHA are tissue
hypoxia due to anemia, and thromboembolic disease,
including disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
and pulmonary thromboembolism.

689

the mean age is 5–6 years, with a reported range of
1–13 years. In feline IMHA, young, male, mixed breed and
Domestic Shorthair cats are overrepresented.
Clinical signs vary with the severity and duration of
onset of the anemia, but often include lethargy, depres­
sion, weakness, and anorexia. Collapse, vomiting, diarrhea,
tachypnea, and polydipsia are less common. Multisystemic
hemorrhages may occur secondary to DIC, whereas red
urine may occur with intravascular hemolysis.
Pale mucous membranes are the most common phys­
ical examination finding, but patients may also exhibit
tachycardia, tachypnea, icterus, and fever. A systolic heart
murmur may occur from increased turbulences due to low
red blood cell content. Due to extravascular phagocytosis,
splenomegaly and/or hepatomegaly may be detected. If
the patient’s autoantibodies are primarily active below
normal core body temperatures (cold agglutinins), then
clinical signs may be most prominent at the cooler
extremities, particularly necrosis of the tail, ear tips, nose,
and nail bed (Figure 16.9).

Differential diagnosis
Hemorrhage or other causes of hemolysis, including
infectious hemolytic anemia, oxidant-induced hemolytic
anemia, congenital erythrocyte defects, hypophospha­
temia, envenomation, mechanical fragmentation, and
hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma.

Diagnosis
CBC often reveals severe to moderate (0.05–0.3 l/l [5–30%])
anemia with evidence of regeneration (reticulocyto­
sis and polychromasia) and support for regeneration
(increased MCV, decreased MCHC, anisocytosis, nucleated
RBCs in circulation [metarubricytosis, rubricytosis, or
normoblastemia], Howell–Jolly bodies, basophilic stip­
pling, and siderocytes). Identification of agglutination
16.9

Clinical presentation
Primary IMHA may occur in dogs of any signalment,
but young adult to middle-aged dogs, females, and sev­
eral breeds (American Cocker Spaniel, Bichon Frise,
Collie, English Springer Spaniel, Finnish Spitz, Miniature
Pinscher, Miniature Schnauzer, Old English Sheepdog,
and Poodle) have an increased risk of disease. In dogs,

K22463_C016.indd 689

Figure 16.9 Cold agglutinin disease demonstrating necrotic ear
tips. (Courtesy J. Thompson)

25/04/16 11:15 pm

690

Diseases of specific organ systems

or spherocytes confirms an immune-mediated etiology
for the anemia (Figures 16.10–16.12); however, sphero­
cytes are difficult to appreciate in cats since their RBCs
16.10

Figure 16.10 Gross appearance of macroscopic agglutination.
(Courtesy J. Thompson)

normally lack central pallor. The saline test is helpful in
distinguishing agglutination from rouleaux. A drop of
physiologic saline is mixed with a drop of blood, and then
examined as a wet mount. The dilution will reduce rouleau
formation, but agglutinated RBCs remain in tight clus­
ters (Figures 16.13, 16.14). Ghost cells may be seen with
intravascular hemolysis (Figure 16.15). The leukogram
is often inflammatory, and is characterized by moderate
to marked neutrophilia, regenerative left shift, variable
lymphocyte counts, and monocytosis. Neutrophil toxicity
is usually absent or mild. Neutrophils may contain hemo­
siderin, and monocytes may exhibit erythrophagocyto­
sis. Thrombocytopenia is present in 25–70% of dogs with
IMHA, and may be due to concurrent immune-mediated
platelet destruction (Evan’s syndrome) or DIC.

16.13

16.11

Figure 16.13 Rouleaux formation in a wet mount of blood
before the addition of saline to dilute or reduce cell adherence.
(Courtesy J. Thompson)

Figure 16.11 Microscopic RBC agglutination on a
Romanowsky-stained blood smear.
16.12

Figure 16.12 Compared with normal RBCs (arrows),
spherocytes (arrowheads) are more eosinophilic, appear
smaller, and lack central pallor.

K22463_C016.indd 690

16.14

Figure 16.14 Wet mount of blood demonstrating tight red
cell clusters following addition of saline, indicating true
agglutination. (Courtesy J. Thompson)

25/04/16 11:15 pm

Hematologic disorders

16.15

Figure 16.15 Blood smear from a dog with immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia shows spherocytes (black arrow), ghost cells
(arrowheads), and one polychromatophil (white arrow).

Serum biochemistry findings may include hyperbili­
rubinemia due to enhanced RBC destruction, and eleva­
tions in ALT and AST activities with hypoxic liver injury.
ALP activity may be increased with cholestasis and, in the
dog, stress.
Urine may be golden yellow or orange due to biliru­
binuria or red due to hemoglobinuria. Proteinuria may be
attributed to hemoglobinuria or renal injury secondary
to immune complex deposition, hypoxia, or hemoglobin
nephropathy. Cylindruria may present as Hgb or granu­
lar casts.
A direct antiglobulin test or Coombs test identifies
antibody and complement on the surface of RBCs, and
is used to diagnose IMHA in the absence of agglutina­
tion. The Coombs test may be positive in up to 75% of
animals with IMHA. For this test, the patient’s washed
RBCs are combined with antiglobulin reagent. This
reagent contains species-specific antibodies that bind
complement and the Fc portion of the patient’s antibod­
ies. When the patient’s complement and antibodies are
bound to the patient’s RBCs, the antiglobulin reagent
creates antibody bridges, and induces RBC agglutination.
Agglutination, when observed, is diagnostic for the pres­
ence of ­antibody-coated erythrocytes. A positive Coombs
test may also occur with secondary hemolytic anemias,
lymphoproliferative disorders, and immune-mediated
thrombocytopenia. False-negative results occur with the
recent use of corticosteroids or low levels of antibody
present on the red cell surface.
Additional tests, such as diagnostic imaging and
serologic testing for blood-borne infectious agents,
should be pursued to rule out causes of secondary
IMHA.

K22463_C016.indd 691

691

Management
Specific treatment of IMHA is directed at immune sup­
pression, and may involve one or more of the following
drugs.
Parenterally administered dexamethasone (0.1–0.2
mg/kg IV q12h) is preferred by many clinicians in the
initial management scheme if the patient is unable to
receive oral medications. Oral prednisone or predniso­
lone can be given at a dose of 2 mg/kg for 2–4 weeks. If
the PCV is stable, the dose is decreased to 1 mg/kg/day
for 2–4 weeks; then, if the PCV is still ­stable, the dose
is decreased to 1 mg/kg every other day for 2–4 weeks,
gradually tapered to the lowest effective dose, and main­
tained on this low alternate day dose for 9–12 months.
Treatment for IMHA should probably always include glu­
cocorticoids given in the proper dosage for the appropri­
ate duration. Relapse most often arises when too little is
given for too short a time. Side-effects of glucocorticoid
therapy include panting, polyuria, polydipsia, polypha­
gia, alopecia, cutaneous atrophy, vacuolar hepatopathy,
and iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism.
Azathioprine is typically reserved for severe cases of
IMHA (intravascular hemolysis, persistent RBC agglu­
tination, or nonregenerative anemia), when the ani­
mal is not neutropenic (<2,000/µl) or thrombocytopenic
(<80,000/µl). The dosage for dogs is 2 mg/kg/day PO for
1–2 weeks, then 1–2 mg/kg PO every other day; for cats
it is 0.3 mg/kg PO every 1–2 days. Although side-effects
of azathioprine therapy are infrequent, they may include
acute pancreatitis, hepatotoxicosis, bone marrow toxico­
sis, and GI disease.
Cyclosporine is traditionally reserved for refractory
IMHA that fails to respond to corticosteroid and azathi­
oprine therapy. The current recommended starting dose
for dogs is 5–10 mg/kg PO q12–24h. Trough plasma levels
around 100–300 ng/ml are suggested, and may be mon­
itored every 2–4 weeks. Treatment with cyclosporine
may be discontinued after remission occurs for at least
2 weeks. Cyclosporine side-effects include vomiting, gingi­
val hyperplasia, hair loss, and papilloma-like skin lesions.
Cyclophosphamide was used for more severe cases, but
its adverse side-effects have decreased its popularity. It
may take 1–2 weeks before a significant benefit is seen.
The dosage for dogs is 50 mg/m2 every other day, and for
cats it is 200 mg/m2 every 2 weeks.
Other treatment options may include blood
transfusions or splenectomy. Administration of aspi­
­
rin (0.5 mg/kg PO q24h) has been suggested to prevent
thromboemboli in dogs.
Danazol reduces the immune response when used at
a dosage in dogs of 7.5 mg/kg PO q12h. The drug is not

25/04/16 11:15 pm

692

Diseases of specific organ systems

­recommended in cats, as it may be hepatotoxic. In refrac­
tory cases, mycophenolate mofetil (10 mg/kg PO q12h,
side-effects include diarrhea) or leflunomide (4 mg/kg PO
q24h) may be useful.

Prognosis
In general, there is guarded to poor prognosis for
­long-term survival in dogs. While 50–88% of dogs with
IMHA are discharged from the hospital, most die or are
euthanized within the subsequent 2 months. Negative
prognostic indicators are the presence of severe disease
(liver, kidney), thrombocytopenia, SLE, intravascular
hemolysis, RBC agglutination, prolonged coagulation
times (PT and aPTT), left shift, marked leukocytosis, and
icterus. Primary feline IMHA has a 24–32% mortality rate,
and relapse occurs in 16–19% of cases.

drug-induced immune hemolytic anemia
Definition/overview
Red cell destruction is secondary to an adverse or idio­
syncratic drug reaction.

Etiology
Substances known to induce immune hemolytic anemia
include levamisole, carprofen, cephalosporin antibiotics,
griseofulvin, propylthiouracil, and methimazole.

Pathopyhysiology
Drug-induced immune hemolytic anemia (DIIHA) may be
drug-dependent or drug-independent. Drug-dependent
IHA occurs only in the presence of the inciting drug. In these
cases, the immune reaction is directed at the drug, which is
bound to RBC surface antigens. D
­ rug-independent IHA may
occur in the absence of the inciting drug and is likely sec­
ondary to immune system stimulation.

Clinical presentation
Signs are similar to animals with primary IMHA.

Differential diagnosis
Similar to primary IMHA.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on a history of administering a drug
known to induce IMHA, the presence of laboratory find­
ings consistent with IMHA, and the absence of other
causes of secondary IMHA (e.g. erythrocytic parasites).
The diagnosis is confirmed when clinical signs resolve
when the drug is withheld, but then reappear with subse­
quent administration of the drug. However, confirmation

K22463_C016.indd 692

via readministration is rarely pursued because of the
potential for morbidity and mortality.

Management
Drugs known to cause secondary IMHA should be discon­
tinued. Immunosuppressive and supportive therapy is
similar to that of primary IMHA.

alloimmune hemolysis
Definition/overview
Alloimmune hemolysis is immune-mediated destruction
of RBCs that express foreign antigens. The most common
forms of alloimmune hemolysis in small animal medi­
cine are hemolytic transfusion reactions and neonatal
isoerythrolysis (NI).

Etiology
See Principles of transfusion medicine.

Pathophysiology
In dogs, sensitization occurs at least 4 days after ­initial
­antigen exposure. A major hemolytic transfusion reac­
tion occurs when a blood recipient receives a blood
product containing a DEA to which the recipient has
been sensitized, causing hemolysis of the donated RBCs.
NI rarely occurs in dogs, but most commonly involves
a DEA 1.1-positive puppy ingesting colostrum that con­
tains DEA 1
­.1-antibodies from a previously sensitized
DEA 1.1-­negative bitch.
Since RBC alloantibodies occur naturally in cats,
transfusion reactions may occur on the initial exposure
to blood. The naturally occurring anti-B antibodies in
type A cats are weak hemolysins and agglutinins, reduc­
ing the donated RBC half-life to 2.1 days. However, type
B cats produce anti-A antibodies that are strong hemo­
lysins and agglutinins, which can induce severe and lifethreatening hemolytic transfusion reactions. NI is most
commonly seen in kittens, wherein type A or type AB
kittens ingest colostrum that contains type A antibodies
from a type B queen.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs in affected animals are similar to those
with primary IMHA, except for the additional histori­
cal findings of receiving a blood transfusion or nursing
from the dam. Clinical signs can occur within minutes to
days of receiving a blood product or hours to days after
ingesting colostrum. In NI, puppies and kittens are born
healthy and nurse normally, then become pale and weak
within 1–2 days after birth; reluctance to nurse, failure to

25/04/16 11:15 pm

Hematologic disorders

thrive, dyspnea, hemoglobinuria, icterus, tail tip necrosis,
and death may also occur.

Differential diagnosis
Similar differential diagnoses to primary IMHA.

Diagnosis
The blood product recipient’s temperature, heart rate,
­respiratory rate, blood pressure, and PCV should be moni­
tored during the transfusion for signs of an adverse reac­
tion. Evidence of hemolytic transfusion r­ eaction includes
hemolyzed plasma and red urine. Blood typing and
­
cross-matching, if not already performed, can help confirm
a hemolytic transfusion reaction. Clinical signs of nonhe­
molytic transfusion reactions, such as vomiting, diarrhea,
abdominal pain or facial swelling, should also be monitored.
NI should be suspected in pale, icteric 1–2-day-old
kittens and puppies. For a definitive diagnosis of NI, the
dam’s serum or colostrum can be cross-matched against
the sire’s or neonate’s washed RBCs, or by blood typing
the queen and tom or kitten.

Management
Blood transfusion reactions can be avoided or reduced by
blood typing and cross-matching prior to blood p
­ roduct
administration. Starting the transfusion at a slower rate
can help lessen the severity of the reaction if a reaction
were to occur. The blood transfusion may be stopped once
clinical signs of a reaction have been identified, or the
transfusion may be slowed if the reaction is mild.
If NI is identified, puppies and kittens should not be
allowed to nurse from their dam, and should be fed a
milk replacement formula. Blood typing queens and toms
prior to breeding can prevent disease.

hemoplasmosis
(See also Chapter 21: Infectious diseases.)

Definition/overview
Hemotropic mycoplasmosis (hemoplasmosis, formerly
hemobartonellosis) is an infectious hemolytic disease of
mammals caused by small, pleomorphic bacteria that
parasitize the surface of RBCs. Acute hemolytic anemia
is most common in cats, whereas dogs typically require
immunosuppression, splenectomy, or splenic pathology
to manifest clinical signs of disease.

Etiology
Carrier animals are the source of infection. The
hemoplasmas of feline erythrocytes are Mycoplasma

K22463_C016.indd 693

693

haemofelis, ‘Candidatus Mycoplasma haemominutum’, and
‘Candidatus Mycoplasma turicensis’. Dogs may be infected
by Mycoplasma haemocanis or ‘Candidatus Mycoplasma
haematoparvum’. Potential routes of transmission
include cat fighting, biting arthropods (ticks in dogs and
fleas in cats), periparturient transmission, or blood trans­
fusions. Splenectomy, immunosuppression, or stress can
cause recrudescence of latent infections.

Pathophysiology
Hemoplasmas cause hemolysis by inducing secondary
IMHA, the ‘innocent bystander effect’, and causing direct
RBC lysis. An acute bacteremic phase usually occurs 1
week to 2 months after infection. This phase involves
cyclical bacteremia persisting for weeks to months. An
immune response elicited by the infected erythrocytes
causes them to be rapidly sequestered in the spleen and
other tissues, where they become phagocytized. Bacteria
may be shed from the sequestered erythrocytes and thus
re-enter the blood circulation.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs include those generally observed with
hemolytic anemia (see primary IMHA). Fever is cyclical
and corresponds to high levels of bacteremia. Canine
hemoplasmosis and the small form of feline hemoplas­
mosis are often not associated with clinical disease unless
other conditions exist.

Differential diagnosis
Similar differential diagnoses to primary IMHA.

Diagnosis
CBC, biochemical, and urinalysis abnormalities are almost
identical to primary IMHA, except that Mycoplasma organ­
isms may be observed on the surface of RBCs or in the
background of the smear if there is a delay between sam­
ple collection and blood smear preparation. However, bac­
teremia is cyclical during the acute phase, so absence of
visible organisms does not rule out infection. Organisms
are rare or inapparent during preparasitemic, recovery,
and carrier phases. Blood films should be well stained
without precipitate to minimize any confusion in iden­
tifying the parasite. Cats often have coccoid or ring
shapes, whereas dogs mostly have linear chain forms
(Figures 16.16, 16.17). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)based tests can identify infections when organisms are
not microscopically apparent. A positive Coombs test may
be observed. Bacterial consumption of glucose in a blood
sample may cause in-vitro hypoglycemia with heavy bac­
terial loads.

25/04/16 11:15 pm

694

Diseases of specific organ systems

16.16

animals that recover may become latent carriers, and
there is potential for disease recrudescence during times
of immune compromise or stress.

babesiosi
(See also Chapter 21: Infectious diseases.)

Definition/overview

Figure 16.16 Blood smear from cat with coccoid and ring forms
of Mycoplasma haemofelis.
16.17

Babesiosis is a tick-borne protozoal disease affecting
erythrocytes of dogs (Babesia canis, Babesia gibsoni).
Babesia felis has not been reported in North American
cats, but is reported in Africa and southern Asia.

Etiology
Ixodid ticks are the major vectors of Babesia spp., although
there have been cases of infection through blood trans­
fusion and transplacental transmission. Sporozoites are
transmitted through the tick’s saliva during a blood meal,
but the parasite needs to feed for at least 2 days before
transmission occurs. Infection is also thought to occur
through dog fighting.

Pathophysiology

Figure 16.17 Mycoplasma haemocanis forms chains on the
surface of dog erythrocytes.

Management
Treatment involves blood transfusion if the ­
anemia
is severe. Prednisolone (2 mg/kg PO q12h) may be
necessary initially to suppress the severe immune-­
­
mediated destruction of red cells. Doxycycline is
the preferred antibiotic: dogs (5 mg/kg PO q12h
for 3 weeks); cats (1–3 mg/kg PO q12h for 3 weeks).
Doxycycline administration in cats should be followed
by 5 ml of water in order to avoid esophageal irrita­
tion. Tetracycline (22 mg/kg PO q8h for 3 weeks) can be
given, but this may cause fever and GI disease in cats,
so the drug dosage or form of tetracycline may need to
be modified. Enrofloxacin (5–10 mg/kg PO q24h) has
shown efficacy in cats, but large doses can cause blind­
ness. Blood donor animals should be screened for hemo­
plasma infection by PCR.

Prognosis
If the animal survives the initial hemolytic crisis, there is
a good long-term prognosis. Even with antibiotic therapy,

K22463_C016.indd 694

Babesia organisms become engulfed by erythrocytes, in
which the parasites multiply to merozoites capable of
infecting other erythrocytes. The incubation period is
10–12 days. Hosts are usually able to mount an effective
immune response at this stage. If not, infected animals
may develop a severe hemolytic anemia, hypotensive
shock, and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. Direct
RBC lysis and secondary IMHA contribute to the anemia.
Animals may relapse following therapy and affected dogs
often remain carriers.

Clinical presentation
Babesiosis is common in kennel conditions and is
­especially associated with Greyhounds and American Pit
Bull Terriers. The animal may have a history of immune
compromise (e.g. cancer chemotherapy) or splenectomy.
Clinical signs in affected animals are similar to those with
primary IMHA.

Differential diagnosis
Similar differential diagnoses to primary IMHA.

Diagnosis
CBC, biochemical, and urinalysis abnormalities are
almost identical to primary IMHA, except that Babesia
organisms may be observed within RBCs as clear,
­tear-drop-shaped organisms, sometimes in pairs. B. canis is
often large (Figure 16.18), while B. gibsoni is much smaller

25/04/16 11:15 pm

Hematologic disorders

16.18

695

Prognosis
Despite treatment, animals should be considered infected
for life. A high incidence of relapse is reported.

oxidant-induced hemolytic anemia
Definition/overview
Irreversible damage occurs to erythrocytes when
the ­
normal protective antioxidant mechanisms are
exceeded, resulting in the formation of Heinz bodies or
eccentrocytes.

Figure 16.18 Singular or paired tear-drop-shaped organisms of
Babesia canis in three agglutinated erythrocytes.
16.19

Etiology
Oxidative agents that cause precipitation of Hgb and
fusion of RBC membranes produce Heinz bodies and
eccentrocytes, respectively. Causes of oxidant-induced
hemolytic anemia include onions, garlic, Chinese chives,
zinc (e.g. pennies, toys, zippers, galvinized wire, and zinc
phosphide rodenticides), acetaminophen (paracetamol),
methylene blue (in old urinary antiseptics), vitamin
K3, methionine, topical benzocaine, propofol, mothball
ingestion, propylene glycol, and skunk spray. Heinz body
formation in cats has also been associated with diabetic
ketoacidosis, hyperthyroidism, and lymphoma.

Pathophysiology

Figure 16.19 Two small Babesia gibsoni (arrows) organisms in
canine erythrocytes.

Accelerated red cell destruction involves intravascular
fragmentation and extravascular phagocytosis by the
spleen. Feline RBCs are predisposed to oxidant damage
because of their Hgb structure.

(Figure 16.19). An indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA)
serum test is available, which, when titers are high, indi­
cates current infection. The most sensitive and specific test
for genus, species, and subspecies is the PCR-based assay.
Concurrent infections with Ehrlichia canis may occur.
A Coombs test may be positive, as in IMHA. In severe cases,
DIC may be present.

Clinical presentation

Management

Diagnosis is made by the observation of hemolytic anemia
(regenerative anemia, icterus, hemolysis, hemoglobin­
uria, and/or ghost cells) with many Heinz bodies and/or
eccentrocytes on a blood smear. On R
­ omanowsky-stained
blood smears, Heinz bodies are large, pale-staining areas
in erythrocytes, or blunt projections from the membrane
surface (Figure 16.20); there is only one Heinz body per
RBC. On new methylene blue-stained wet mounts or dried
blood smears, Heinz bodies are dark blue spots within
RBCs (Figure 16.21). Eccentrocytes are RBCs with densely
packed Hgb on one side of the cell and a thin colorless
portion, or hemighost, on the opposite side (Figure 16.22).
When the hemighost fragments off from the RBC, the

Treatment primarily involves imidocarb dipropionate
12% (Imizol®) at a dose of 6.6 mg/kg IM given once with
a repeat dose in 2 weeks. This clears the large form
infection but may only reduce the severity of the small
form infection. Additionally, diminazene aceturate
(Berenil®) (3–7 mg/kg IM given once), phenamidine ise­
thionate (15 mg/kg SC q24h for 2 days), or an atovaquone
(13.5 mg/kg PO q8h administered with a fatty meal for
10 ­
consecutive days) and azithromycin (10 mg/kg PO
q24h for 10 consecutive days) combination can be given.
Supportive therapy (e.g. blood transfusion) should be
given when indicated.

K22463_C016.indd 695

Clinical signs of affected animals are similar to those with
acute primary IMHA.

Differential diagnosis
Similar differential diagnoses to primary IMHA.

Diagnosis

25/04/16 11:15 pm

696

Diseases of specific organ systems

remaining RBC is termed a pyknocyte. With zinc toxi­
cosis, abdominal radiographs may reveal ingestion of a
metal object.
16.20

Management
Treatment primarily involves removal of the source
of oxidant. Emetics can be used if recent ingestion has
occurred. Blood transfusions or other forms of support­
ive care should be given as indicated. Acetylcysteine
(Mucomyst®) (140 mg/kg of a 5% solution diluted with
saline IV initially, then give 70 mg/kg [of a 5% solu­
tion] q4–6h for 3–5 treatments) should be given to treat
­acetaminophen-induced toxicity.

microangiopathic hemolytic anemia
Definition/overview
Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia is due to mechanical
fragmentation of normal RBCs in an abnormal vascula­
ture system.

Figure 16.20 Heinz bodies in intact erythrocytes (arrows)
and ghost cells (arrowheads) in a cat with oxidant-induced
hemolytic anemia.
16.21

Etiology
Diseases that cause intravascular deposition of fibrin,
turbulent blood flow, or abnormal blood vessel morphol­
ogy can cause mechanical fragmentation of normal RBCs.
These diseases include DIC, vasculitis, hemangiosar­
coma, heart valvular defects, dirofilariasis (Figure 16.23),
splenic disease, hepatic disease, glomerulonephritis,
myelofibrosis, and intravascular lymphoma.

Pathophysiology
Fibrin strands or abnormal rheologic forces cause
­shearing or lysis or RBCs. The RBC fragments, including
schistocytes, acanthocytes, and keratocytes, are removed
from circulation by the monocyte–macrophage system.

Differential diagnosis
Figure 16.21 Heinz bodies are basophilic round structures with
new methylene blue stain.

Blood loss, IMHA, oxidant-induced hemolysis, infec­
tious hemolytic anemia, liver disease, disorders of lipid
metabolism.

16.22

16.23

Figure 16.22 Eccentrocytes (arrows) in a dog receiving a
continuous rate infusion of propofol.

K22463_C016.indd 696

Figure 16.23 Microfilaria in a dog with Dirofilaria immitus
infection.

25/04/16 11:15 pm

Hematologic disorders

697

Clinical presentation

Pathophysiology

The clinical presentation varies depending on the cause
of the RBC fragmentation.

PK is an enzyme in the glycolytic pathway that is necessary
for the anaerobic production of adenosine triphosphate
(ATP). Therefore, energy metabolism is markedly impaired
in PK-deficient RBCs, leading to shortened RBC life spans
and hemolytic anemia. Persistent anemia causes increased
intestinal absorption of iron and subsequent hepatic
(hemosiderosis, hemochromatosis, cirrhosis, and failure)
and bone marrow (myelofibrosis and osteosclerosis) injury.

Diagnosis
Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia is typically a regen­
erative anemia with evidence of RBC fragmentation on
blood smear evaluation (e.g. schistocytes, acanthocytes,
keratocytes) (Figure 16.24). The degree of anemia is typi­
cally mild, but may be moderate to rarely severe. Marrow
erythropoiesis may be able to compensate for the degree
of hemolysis, so RBC regeneration and/or anemia may
not be present. Diagnosis of the underlying disease may
include CBC with blood smear evaluation, heartworm
antigen test, serum biochemical and urine analysis, coag­
ulation panel, abdominal and thoracic imaging, and bone
marrow biopsy.

Management
Management is directed at resolving the underlying
cause of the microangiopathy.

pyruvate kinase deficiency
Definition/overview
Pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency is a congenital deficiency
in glycolytic enzymes. The condition has been docu­
mented in dogs (Basenji, Beagle, West Highland White
Terrier, Cairn Terrier, American Eskimo Dog, Miniature
Poodle, Chihuahua, and Pug) and cats (Abyssinian,
Somali, and Domestic Shorthair cats).

Etiology
PK deficiency is an autosomal recessive trait due to a
variety of mutations in the erythrocyte PK gene.

Clinical presentation
Heterozygotes show no clinical signs. Homozygotes often
present in their youth with pale mucous membranes,
exercise intolerance, tachycardia, and splenomegaly. Cats
may not present until they are at an advanced age, or
with intermittent hemolytic anemia.

Differential diagnosis
Phosphofructokinase deficiency, IMHA, oxidant-induced
hemolysis, mycoplasmosis, babesiosis.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is suggested by the presence of hemolytic
­anemia with an intense reticulocytosis (15–50%) and fre­
quent nucleated red cells in a young dog (Figure 16.25).
Splenectomy results in marked poikilocytosis with
schistocytes and acanthocytes. Dogs may also show bio­
chemical signs of liver injury or failure, as well as hema­
tologic evidence of marrow failure (e.g. neutropenia and
thrombocytopenia). PCR-based tests are available for the
Basenji, West Highland White Terrier, Beagle, Dachshund,
Toy Eskimo, and Cairn Terrier dog breeds, as well as
Abyssinian and Somali cats. Definitive diagnosis for other
breeds requires PK isoenzyme characterization.
16.25

16.24

Figure 16.24 This dog with disseminated intravascular
coagulation has circulating schistocytes (black arrow),
acanthocytes (arrowhead), and keratocytes (white arrow).

K22463_C016.indd 697

Figure 16.25 Pyruvate kinase deficiency in a dog showing
polychromasia and several echinocytes (arrows).

25/04/16 11:15 pm

698

Diseases of specific organ systems

16.26

Management
There is no specific treatment.

Prognosis
Dogs usually die between 1 and 5 years of age.

phosphofructokinase deficiency
Definition/overview
Phosphofructokinase (PFK) deficiency is a congenital
deficiency in glycolytic enzymes. It has been identified in
English Springer Spaniels, American Cocker Spaniels, and
mixed-breed dogs.

Etiology
A nonsense mutation of the muscle-type PFK gene leads
to truncation of M-type PFK enzyme, which is structurally
unstable and rapidly degrades.

Pathophysiology
Decreased PFK in RBCs leads to decreased glycolysis and
anaerobic ATP generation, as well as decreased concen­
trations of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG). Energy
metabolism is impaired in PFK-deficient RBCs, leading
to a shortened RBC life span and hemolytic anemia. The
2,3-DPG deficiency causes an increase in intracellular pH,
and RBCs are especially fragile under alkaline conditions,
such as hyperventilation-induced alkalemia.

Clinical presentation
Heterozygote dogs show no clinical signs. Homozygote
dogs have persistent compensated hemolytic anemia
with sporadic episodes of intravascular hemolysis.
Animals between episodes of hemolytic crises appear
clinically normal or may have a decreased muscle mass;
Hct is typically 30–45%. Clinical signs during hemolytic
crises include lethargy, pale or icteric mucous mem­
branes, hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, hepatospleno­
megaly, and fever. Persistent reticulocytosis (10–30%) and
metarubricytosis are often noted (Figure 16.26).

Differential diagnosis
PK deficiency, IMHA, oxidant-induced hemolysis, myco­
plasmosis, babesiosis.

Diagnosis
A PCR-based test differentiates normal, heterozygote, and
homozygote animals of any age. Homozygotes can also be
identified after 3 months of age by measuring erythro­
cyte PFK activity.

K22463_C016.indd 698

Figure 16.26 Polychromasia and metarubricytosis in a dog with
phosphofructokinase deficiency. (Courtesy H. Tvedten.)

Management
Management is directed at avoiding situations that could
lead to hyperventilation, such as excessive exercise,
excitement, or high temperatures.

Prognosis
Dogs may have a normal life span if properly managed.

other causes of hemolytic anemia
Other rare congenital hemolytic anemias have been
documented. Feline erythropoietic porphyria has been
reported in a family of Siamese cats that had hemolytic
anemia, photosensitivity, and renal disease. A hereditary
nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia has been identified in
three related Beagles that exhibited persistent regener­
ative mild anemia (Hct, 30–39%). Idiopathic hemolytic
anemia has been documented in 13 Abyssinian and five
Somali cats with regenerative moderate to marked ane­
mias (Hct, 5–25%).
Uncommon to rare causes of acquired hemolytic ane­
mia include snake envenomation, hypophosphatemia,
hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma, L-sorbose intoxica­
tion, and hypo­-osmolality. Hematologic changes also noted
with snakebites include spherocyte formation, echinocyto­
sis, and coagulation abnormalities. Marked hypophospha­
temia, typically ≤1.0–1.5 mg/dl, may cause intracellular
ATP depletion, loss of RBC membrane integrity, and subse­
quent hemolysis. Severe hypophosphatemia has been asso­
ciated with insulin administration in dogs and cats with
diabetes mellitus, feline idiopathic hepatic lipidosis, and
enteral alimentation in dogs and cats. Hemophagocytic
histiocytic sarcoma is a malignant proliferation of mac­
rophages that exhibit marked erythrophagocytic activity.

25/04/16 11:15 pm

Hematologic disorders

The neoplasm occurs with high incidence in Bernese
Mountain Dogs, Golden Retrievers, Rottweilers, and
Labrador Retrievers; it is rare in cats. Affected animals
often present with Coombs-negative regenerative ane­
mia, thrombocytopenia, hypoalbuminemia, hypocholes­
terolemia, and diffuse splenomegaly. Oral ingestion of
L-sorbose, a sugar substitute, by dogs may cause intravas­
cular hemolytic anemia secondary to glycolysis inhibition
and decreased production of ATP within erythrocytes.
Dogs with inherited high Na-K-ATPase activity in their
RBCs (e.g. Japanese Akitas and Japanese Shibas) are resis­
tant to hemolysis. Hypo-osmolar hemolysis may occur
with rapid IV infusion of hypotonic fluids.

NONREGENERATIVE ANEMIA
A poorly regenerative or nonregenerative anemia is
­generally due to decreased RBC production in the bone
marrow. Causes of regenerative anemia (hemorrhage and
hemolysis) appear initially nonregenerative since the bone
marrow requires at least 3–4 days to undergo erythroid
hyperplasia and release greater numbers of reticulocytes.

preregenerative anemia
cytauxzoonosis
Definition/overview
Cytauxzoonosis, caused by Cytauxzoon felis, is a highly
fatal protozoal disease of wild and domestic cats in the
southern USA. It is a tick-borne disease whose natural res­
ervoir host is the bobcat, and possibly Florida panthers.

Etiology
Cytauxzoon felis is transmitted by Dermacentor ­variabilis
and Amblyomma americanum ticks. The organism is a
piroplasm hemoparasite of the family Theileriidae.

699

anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and splenomeg­
aly. The nonregenerative nature of the anemia is thought
to represent a preregenerative state wherein the bone
marrow has not had adequate time to respond to the
acute onset of hemolysis. Regeneration is poorly docu­
mented since cats usually die within 1 week after clinical
signs are recognized.

Differential diagnosis
Other infectious agents, neoplasia, organ failure, DIC.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is generally made postmortem by histologic
identification of large schizonts in macrophages lining
the sinusoids and veins of many tissues. Terminally,
blood films may contain small (1–2 mm in d
­ iameter)
ring or ‘safety pin’ structures within erythrocytes
(Figure 16.27).

Management
Traditionally, diminazene aceturate (2 mg/kg IM,
repeated in 7 days) or imidocarb dipropionate (2 mg/kg
IM, repeated in 2 weeks) has been used to treat cytauxzoo­
nosis. However, a recent clinical trial achieved a 60% sur­
vival rate with atovaquone (15 mg/kg PO q8h for 10 days)
and azithromycin (10 mg/kg PO q24h for 10 days) com­
pared with a 26% survival rate with imidocarb dipropio­
nate (3.5 mg/kg IM). Supportive therapy may include fluid
therapy and heparin (100–200 U/kg SC q8h). Atropine
(0.04 mg/kg, repeated in 7 days) is recommended prior to
treatment with imidocarb to reduce the immediate toxic
effects of this drug. Blood transfusions are necessary for
those cats with severe anemia.

16.27

Pathophysiology
Macrophages infected with schizonts, a large mem­
brane-bound structure containing numerous merozoites,
line and occlude blood vessels throughout the body. This
leads to tissue ischemia and hypoxia, organ dysfunction,
and DIC. Schizonts release merozoites, which infect eryth­
rocytes, and cause hemolysis.

Clinical presentation
Initial clinical signs include anorexia, dehydration, and
lethargy, with gradual development of fever. This pro­
gresses rapidly to icterus, moderate nonregenerative

K22463_C016.indd 699

Figure 16.27 Blood smear with multiple organisms from a cat
infected with Cytauxzoon felis. (Courtesy N. Weinstein)

25/04/16 11:16 pm

700

Diseases of specific organ systems

Prognosis
Traditionally, cats have a guarded to grave p
­rognosis
despite the use of antibiotics and supportive care. However,
a high survival rate may be achieved with contemporary
therapy.

selective erythroid hypoplasia or aplasia
Selective erythroid hypoplasia or aplasia is decreased
or absent RBC production in the bone marrow with­
out decreased production of other hematopoietic cells.
Therefore, neutropenia and thrombocytopenia due to
decreased production are not present.

anemia of inflammatory or chronic disease
Definition/overview
Inflammatory or chronic disease is the most frequent
cause of nonregenerative anemia. The anemia is usually
mild to moderate in severity. Once recognized, it is of lit­
tle clinical significance.

Etiology
Almost any chronic disorder can initiate this anemia,
including infectious diseases, immune-mediated dis­
eases, toxicities, and neoplasms.

Pathophysiology
The mechanism may involve decreased ­erythropoiesis,
reduced iron availability through sequestration in mac­
rophages, and decreased RBC survival. Studies have
shown that cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor
(TNF), interferon-gamma, and interleukin (IL)-1, inhibit
erythropoietin synthesis and decrease the responsive­
ness of progenitor cells to growth factors.

Clinical presentation
Affected animals may present with prolonged anorexia,
weight loss, and weakness. Other clinical signs reflect the
actual source of chronic inflammation or organ systems
affected.

a normal to increased myeloid:erythroid ratio. The MCV
may be normal to slightly decreased.

Management
Treatment is directed at the underlying disease, and not
the anemia. Iron supplementation does not effectively
reverse this form of anemia.

anemia of chronic kidney disease
(See also Chapter 12: Nephrology/urology.)

Definition/overview
The peritubular interstitial cells in the renal cortex pro­
duce erythropoietin (EPO) at a rate inversely proportional
to the oxygen content (and therefore RBC mass) of blood.

Etiology
The anemia is primarily due to EPO deficiency, with minor
contributions from decreased marrow responsiveness to
EPO and decreased RBC survival. Concurrent hemorrhage
caused by uremic ulcers may contribute to the anemia.

Pathophysiology
Inadequate EPO and reduced response to EPO lead to
decreased erythropoiesis. Uremic toxins may damage
RBCs, and decrease RBC life span.

Clinical presentation
Patients may present with weakness, weight loss, inap­
petence, and pale mucous membranes. In addition, they
may display vomiting, diarrhea, polyuria, and polydipsia.

Differential diagnosis
Gastric ulcers, chronic liver disease, chronic inflamma­
tion, neoplasia, iron deficiency.

Diagnosis

Differential diagnosis

Diagnosis of renal failure involves the presence of azote­
mia and an abnormal urinalysis. The major hematologic
abnormality is normocytic, normochromic nonregenera­
tive anemia. Abnormal RBCs called burr cells (Figure 16.28)
are associated with chronic kidney disease.

Iron deficiency anemia, neoplasia, organ failure, pre­
regenerative anemia.

Management

Diagnosis
Laboratory findings often indicate a mild to moderate,
normocytic, normochromic anemia, inflammatory leuk­
ogram, low serum iron, low total iron-binding capacity,
and increased serum ferritin and bone marrow stores
of iron. The bone marrow is usually hypocellular, with

K22463_C016.indd 700

A recombinant form of human erythropoietin (Epogen®)
has been used in dogs and cats to promote prolifera­
tion and differentiation of red cell precursors. Dogs: ini­
tial dose of 150 U/kg SC or IV, three times a week; cats:
initial dose of 100 U/kg SC or IV, 2–3 times a week. These
initial doses are given until a low normal hematocrit is
reached (37% [0.37 l/l] in dogs and 30% [0.30 l/l] in cats).

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

701

16.28

16.29

Figure 16.28 Burr cells (arrows) and ovalocytes (arrowheads)
are elongate erythrocytes with and without ruffled borders,
respectively.

Figure 16.29 Three acanthocytes (arrowheads) with multiple
irregularly shaped cytoplasmic projections.

The dose is then reduced to 1–2 times weekly for 3 weeks.
After this, the maintenance dosage is adjusted to the ani­
mal and is usually given once per week. Maintenance
involves periodic monitoring of the hematocrit and detec­
tion of any side-effects. Most side-effects occur from an
immune reaction to the human erythropoietin and non­
regenerative IMHA.

Differential diagnosis

anemia of chronic liver disease
(See also Chapter 9: Liver disorders.)

Definition/overview
Decreased liver functional mass may influence red cell
production, survival, or loss.

Etiology
Chronic liver failure or portosystemic shunts may cause
a significantly decreased liver functional mass. The liver
produces a small percentage of EPO.

Pathophysiology
Mechanisms for nonregenerative anemia may include
anemia of chronic/inflammatory disease, decreased RBC
life span due to defective protein and lipid metabolism,
iron sequestration due to decreased production of iron
transport proteins, and EPO deficiency. Iron sequestra­
tion may cause microcytosis. Concurrent blood loss sec­
ondary to decreased liver production of clotting factors
may contribute to the anemia.

Clinical presentation
Patients may present with weakness, weight loss, inap­
petence, and pale mucous membranes. In addition, they
may display vomiting, diarrhea, polyuria, and polydipsia.

K22463_C016.indd 701

Chronic kidney disease, chronic inflammation in other
sites, neoplasia.

Diagnosis
The anemia is typically mild to moderate, normocytic,
and normochromic; microcytosis is occasionally noted.
Blood smears often reveal acanthocytes (Figure 16.29) or
budding fragmentation. Laboratory findings suggestive
of hepatic disease include elevated serum liver enzymes
(ALT, ALP, GGT), increased serum bile acid levels, and
hyperbilirubinemia. Indicators of liver failure include
decreases in serum glucose, BUN, albumin, and choles­
terol concentrations, as well as prolonged clotting times
and increased serum bile acid and ammonium levels.
Abdominal imaging and liver biopsy may help identify
the cause of the liver disease.

Management
Treatment is directed at the underlying liver disease, and
not the anemia.

anemia of endocrine disorders
(See also Chapter 11: Endocrine disorders.)

Definition/overview
Hypothyroidism and hypoadrenocorticism may cause
mild to moderate nonregenerative anemia in dogs.
Anemia due to hyperestrogenism is discussed elsewhere
(see Generalized marrow hypoplasia or aplasia).

Etiology
Anemia is secondary
hypoadrenocorticism.

to

hypothyroidism

and

25/04/16 11:16 pm

702

Diseases of specific organ systems

Pathophysiology
In hypothyroidism, low levels of thyroid hormone cause
a decreased metabolic rate, and thus reduced oxygen
requirement by the tissues. This decreases EPO produc­
tion, and then erythropoiesis. Glucocorticoids have a stim­
ulatory effect on erythropoiesis; therefore, g
­ lucocorticoid
deficiency is expected to reduce erythropoiesis. GI hem­
orrhage due to glucocorticoid deficiency may contribute
to the anemia.

Clinical presentation

with chronic external blood loss, and less frequently with
inadequate dietary intake.

Etiology
Etiologies include chronic GI hemorrhage (neoplasia,
intestinal parasites, or ulcerative diseases), chronic cuta­
neous blood loss (fleas, ticks, or bleeding tumors), and
repeated phlebotomy (blood donor animals).

Pathophysiology

Hypothyroidism is most common in young to
middle aged (4–10 years), large breed dogs, particu­
­
larly Golden Retrievers, Dobermanns, Irish Setters, and
Miniature Schnauzers. Clinical signs include lethargy,
exercise intolerance, mental dullness, obesity, dermato­
logic changes, and reproductive disturbances. Dogs with
hypoadrenocorticism are frequently young to middle aged
with an increased incidence in Standard Poodles, West
Highland White Terriers, Great Danes, Bearded Collies, and
Portuguese Water Dogs. Clinical signs include anorexia,
vomiting, diarrhea, weight loss, polydipsia, polyuria,
melena, dehydration, acute weakness, and collapse.

Hemoglobin synthesis is dependent on iron availability,
and RBC maturation is dependent on adequate intra­
cytoplasmic concentrations of hemoglobin. During times
of iron deficiency, RBCs undergo additional mitoses to
form smaller cells (microcytes) in an attempt to reach
optimal intracytoplasmic concentrations of hemoglobin.
With continued iron unavailability, the microcytes are no
longer able to obtain optimal intracytoplasmic hemoglo­
bin concentrations, thereby forming hypochromic cells.
RBCs formed during times of iron deficiency are more
fragile and less deformable, and therefore lyse easily in
­circulation. This leads to decreased RBC life spans, and the
formation of keratocytes, acanthocytes, and schistocytes.

Differential diagnosis

Clinical presentation

Organ failure, chronic inflammation, neoplasia, drug
toxicosis.

Clinical signs of iron deficiency are nonspecific and
include insidious fatigue and exercise intolerance that
develops over weeks to months. Owners may report pica
as the animal licks or chews at unusual substances to
try to compensate for the iron loss. Physical examina­
tion may reveal a systolic murmur, gallop rhythm, pale
mucous membranes, and bounding pulses. Melena or
hematochezia is usually present, whereas heavy parasit­
ism is less common.

Diagnosis
Hypothyroidism and hypoadrenocorticism produce mild
to moderate normocytic, normochromic nonregenerative
anemia. Dogs with hypoadrenocorticism and GI hemor­
rhage may have regenerative anemia. Other clinicopatho­
logic abnormalities associated with hypoadrenocorticism
include: lack of a stress leukogram; lymphocytosis; eosin­
ophilia; decreased sodium, chloride, glucose, and cho­
lesterol values; increased potassium, calcium, BUN,
creatinine, and phosphorus results; and poorly concen­
trated urine (urine specific gravity <1.030). Definitive
diagnoses of hypothyroidism and hypoadrenocorticism
are based on history, clinical signs, and endocrine testing
(total T4 and TSH concentrations and adrenocorticotropic
hormone [ACTH] stimulation test, respectively).

Management
Treatment is aimed at correcting the endocrine abnor­
mality, since the degree of anemia is generally mild.

iron deficiency anemia
Definition/overview
This condition produces a poorly regenerative anemia
due to deficient Hgb synthesis. It occurs most commonly

K22463_C016.indd 702

Differential diagnosis
Parasitism, neoplasia, organ failure, chronic disease or
inflammation.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on history and the presence of a micro­
cytic hypochromic anemia that is nonregenerative or
poorly regenerative for the degree of anemia. The MCV
usually decreases prior to the MCHC, and so the MCHC
may be within normal limits at the time of presenta­
tion. Erythrocytes in blood smears may appear small
(microcytes) with increased central pallor (hypochro­
masia) (Figure 16.30). Microcytes and hypochromasia
are observed in blood prior to changes in the MCV and
MCHC, since the latter represent average cell values.
Poikilocytosis may be prominent in the form of schisto­
cytes, acanthocytes, keratocytes, codocytes, and ellipto­
cytes (Figure 16.31). Thrombocytosis occurs in 50% of

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

16.30

703

nonregenerative immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia
Definition/overview
Immune-mediated destruction of erythroid precursors
occurs within the bone marrow, resulting in moderate
to marked anemia without reticulocytosis. The bone
marrow may reveal a near complete absence of eryth­
roid p
­ recursors (pure red cell aplasia [PRCA]) or eryth­
roid hyperplasia with maturation arrest (ineffective
erythropoiesis).

Figure 16.30 Iron deficient erythrocytes are small with
increased central pallor (arrows). Regeneration is present in
early stages of iron deficiency anemia (arrowheads).
16.31

Etiology
Similar to the more common regenerative IMHA,
immune-mediated destruction of erythroid precursors
may be primary/idiopathic or secondary. Primary non­
regenerative IMHA is more common in dogs. Potential
causes of secondary PRCA include vaccination of dogs
with a modified live parvovirus vaccine and administra­
tion of recombinant human EPO.

Pathophysiology

Figure 16.31 Late stage iron deficiency anemia with marked
hypochromasia (arrows) and no polychromatophils. Iron
deficient erythrocytes are fragile and prone to fragmentation
(arrowheads).

Immune-mediated destruction of erythroid cells may
occur at any level of maturation. If hemolysis is directed
at erythroid stem cells, there is PRCA. If hemolysis is
directed at later erythroid precursors, there is marked
proliferation of stages prior to the targeted developmen­
tal stage, and near absence of those after. This is termed
‘maturation arrest’, and is indicative of either ineffective
erythropoiesis or an early marrow response to anemia
(preregenerative anemia). Therefore, preregenerative
anemia should be ruled out prior to diagnosing ineffec­
tive erythropoiesis.

Clinical presentation
canine cases. Iron profiles have a decreased serum iron
level (in cats <10.7 µmol/l [60 µg/dl]; in dogs <14.3 µmol/l
[80 µg/dl]), normal to increased level of transferrin (mea­
sured as total iron-binding capacity), and decreased
serum ferritin concentration. Percent saturation of trans­
ferrin in iron deficient animals is often <19% (normal is
about 33%). Bone marrow examination shows decreased
iron stores in the dog, and marked erythroid prolifera­
tion. Absence of bone marrow iron stores is a normal find­
ing in the cat.

Management
Treatment involves correction of the inciting cause for
the blood loss, and iron supplementation. Ferrous sul­
fate is given at a rate of 4–6 mg of iron/kg/day orally in
divided doses. Therapy is continued for several weeks to
months until the PCV and MCV return to normal.

K22463_C016.indd 703

History and physical examination findings are similar to
those seen in animals with regenerative primary IMHA,
except that red plasma and urine are not expected and
icterus is less frequent.

Differential diagnosis
Iron deficiency anemia, anemia of renal failure, drug tox­
icosis, anemia of chronic disease.

Diagnosis
Hematologic findings include moderate to severe normo­
cytic, normochromic nonregenerative anemia (Hct, 5–26%).
Spherocytes and agglutination are present in 15–54% and
0–5% of cases, respectively. Mature and band neutrophils
are often increased, but neutrophils may be within the ref­
erence interval or decreased. Platelets may be increased,
decreased, or within the reference ­
interval. A direct

25/04/16 11:16 pm

704

Diseases of specific organ systems

Coombs test is often positive. Bone marrow findings are
dependent on the RBC stage that is being destroyed, and
may reveal erythroid hypoplasia (including pure red cell
aplasia) or erythroid hyperplasia with maturation arrest.
Increased numbers of lymphocytes and plasma cells are
common, and may compose up to 60% and 33% of the total
marrow cells, respectively. Serum ALT activity is commonly
increased due to hypoxia-induced liver injury, but the total
serum bilirubin concentration is only increased in less than
­one-quarter of cases. Concurrent i­mmune-mediated disor­
ders, such as polyarthritis, positive antinuclear antibody
titers, and the presence of antimegakaryocyte antibodies,
support an immune-mediated etiology.

Management
Treatment is similar to regenerative primary IMHA.

Prognosis
More than 70% of dogs and cats are expected to recover.
However, response to treatment may take weeks to months.

folate or cobalamin (vitamin b12) deficiency
Definition/overview
Folate and cobalamin are acquired through the diet and
intestinally absorbed. Both are needed for DNA synthe­
sis. Unlike most other tissues, the bone marrow is partic­
ularly susceptible to inhibition of DNA synthesis, as the
hematopoietic cells are constantly produced.

Etiology
Folate deficiency has been experimentally produced in
cats fed a folate-deficient diet. However, dogs are highly
resistant to folate deficiency. Congenital cobalamin defi­
ciency is an autosomal recessive trait in Giant Schnauzer
dogs due to a cobalamin receptor complex defect. It has
also been documented in a Beagle, a Border Collie, and
in Australian Shepherd Dogs. Drug-induced folate defi­
ciency is associated with anticonvulsants (phenobarbital,
primidone), sulfonamides (sulfasalazine, trimethoprim–
sulfadiazine), and antineoplastic agents by impairing its
absorption or production. Serum folate and/or cobalamin
levels may be decreased in dogs and cats with various GI,
hepatic and/or pancreatic disorders, but this very rarely
results in anemia.

Pathophysiology
Folate and cobalamin are required for DNA synthesis.
Deficiencies in folate and/or cobalamin impair hemato­
poiesis, especially erythrocyte and neutrophil production.

K22463_C016.indd 704

Nonregenerative anemia with erythroid dysplasia is
typical of folate deficiency; concurrent neutropenia and
myeloid dysplasia often occur. Cobalamin is also a cofactor
for methylmalonyl coenzyme A. Reduced activity of this
enzyme causes accumulation of methymalonic acid (MMA),
which is excreted in the urine and may indirectly impair
urea cycle function.

Clinical presentation
Patients of appropriate breeds are often presented at less
than a year of age for lethargy, inappetence, and failure to
thrive. On physical examination, dogs are often thin with
poorly developed muscle mass or cachexia. Neurologic
signs may be apparent if urea cycle impairment has
caused hyperammonemia.

Differential diagnosis
Myelodysplastic syndrome, drug-induced dysplasias.

Diagnosis
Erythrocyte changes with congenital cobalamin
deficiency include normocytic, normochromic anemia
­
(Hct, 21–36%), anisocytosis, poikilocytes, and nucleated
erythrocytes with fully hemoglobinized cytoplasm and
immature nuclei (megaloblasts). Neutropenia with hyper­
segmented neutrophils is frequently present, but neutro­
philia may occur. Platelet concentrations are typically
normal, and giant platelets may be present. In the bone
marrow, both erythroid hypoplasia and hyperplasia have
been documented, but erythroid and myeloid dysplasia is
a consistent finding. Specific tests include measurement
of serum folate and cobalamin concentrations, as well as
urine MMA concentrations.

Management
Dogs with congenital cobalamin deficiency have been
successfully treated with parenteral cobalamin supple­
mentation (1 mg SC q1–2months, or 20 μg/kg SC q2weeks).

Prognosis
Dogs with congenital cobalamin deficiency have a good
prognosis for recovery.

other causes of selective erythroid
hypoplasia or aplasia
Dyserythropoiesis in English Springer Spaniels is char­
acterized by microcytic normochromic nonregenera­
tive anemia with polymyopathy, megaesophagus, and
cardiomegaly.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

generalized marrow hypoplasia or aplasia
aplastic anemia
Definition/overview
The marrow consists of fat, and is nearly void of all hema­
topoietic cells along with peripheral pancytopenia

Etiology
A variety of etiologies have been implicated, includ­
ing ­
infectious agents (e.g. canine parvovirus, feline
panleukopenia virus, canine distemper virus [CDV],
­
Ehrlichia canis, FeLV, and feline immunodeficiency virus
[FIV]), drugs (e.g. trimethoprim–sulfadiazine, antineoplas­
tic drugs, estradiol, phenylbutazone, fenbendazole, quini­
dine, ­cephalosporins, and griseofulvin), hyperestrogenism
(e.g. Sertoli cell and granulosa cell tumors), whole body
irradiation, and idiopathic immune-mediated stem cell
destruction.

Pathophysiology
Stem cells or progenitor cells are targeted and destroyed,
leading to decreased production of all hematopoietic pre­
cursors (granulocytic, erythroid, and megakaryocytic)
with subsequent pancytopenia.

Clinical presentation
The clinical presentation is partially dependent on the
cause of the aplastic anemia. Specifically, animals with
hyperestrinism may exhibit alopecia, feminization, or
cryptorchidism. Clinical signs attributable to cytopenias
include those associated with anemia (e.g. lethargy, weak­
ness, pale mucous membranes), neutropenia (e.g. fever,
infection, sepsis), and thrombocytopenia (e.g. petechial
hemorrhages, epistaxis).

Differential diagnosis
Idiopathic myelofibrosis, myelophthisic neoplasia, infec­
tious myelitis, FeLV infection.

Diagnosis
Minimal diagnostics include a CBC and bone marrow
aspirate and core biopsies. The diagnosis of aplastic
anemia is based on the presence of nonregenerative
anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia with con­
current marked erythroid and megakaryocytic hypopla­
sia/aplasia in the bone marrow, which is nearly replaced
with adipose tissue. The cytopenias are often moderate
to severe. In CDV infections, erythrocytes or leukocytes
may contain one or more pale blue spots in the cytoplasm

K22463_C016.indd 705

705

when stained with methanolic ­
Romanowsky-type
stains. However, these inclusions stain a deep pur­
ple color with an aqueous Romanowsky stain such as
­Diff-Quik® (Figures 16.32a–d). Additional diagnostics
should be directed at identifying the underlying cause
for the aplastic anemia and include historical inquires
of drug, radiation, or toxin exposure, testing for specific
infectious agents, and evaluation for estrogen-secreting
neoplasms.

Management
Specific treatment is directed at the underlying cause of
the aplastic anemia, and includes cessation of myelotoxic
drug administration, toxin removal, antiviral therapy,
doxycycline administration for chronic E. canis infection,
and surgical removal of estrogen-secreting neoplasms.
Immune suppression may be attempted for idiopathic
aplastic anemia. Supportive therapy may include blood
transfusions for anemia or DIC, broad-spectrum antibi­
otics for neutropenia-induced bacterial infections, and
bone marrow stimulants.

Prognosis
The prognosis is guarded to poor, but complete clinical
recovery is possible.

infiltrative bone marrow disease (myelophthisis)
Definition/overview
Replacement of normal hematopoietic tissue in the bone
marrow is termed myelophthisis.

Etiology
The marrow may be replaced by collagen (­ myelofibrosis),
inflammatory cells (e.g. infectious myelitis due to his­
toplasmosis, other fungal infections, or ­toxoplasmosis),
or neoplastic cells (e.g. hematopoietic or metastatic
neoplasms).

Pathophysiology
Mild infiltrates or focal lesions within the bone mar­
row produce minimal peripheral blood changes.
Cytopenia occurs if the involvement is diffuse and severe.
Myelofibrosis usually occurs as a result of marrow dam­
age produced by inflammation, necrosis, neoplasia, and
toxic agents and may be seen in the terminal stages of
PK deficiency. Myelofibrosis is also associated with myelo­dysplastic syndrome and acute myelogenous leuke­
mia in cats or with chronic myeloid neoplasia in dogs
and cats.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

706

Diseases of specific organ systems

16.32

a

c

b
Figures 16.32a–d. Canine
distemper viral inclusions
in an erythrocyte (a),
lymphocyte (b), and
neutrophils (c and d).
Vibrant magenta staining
occurs with aqueous
Romanowsky staining
(a–c), but methanolic
Romanowsky stains
impart a light pink–blue
appearance (d).

d

Clinical presentation

16.33

Animals are often presented with pale mucous mem­
branes, fever, and bleeding, occasionally accompanied by
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy.

Differential diagnosis
Drug toxicosis, myelodysplastic syndrome, hematolym­
phatic neoplasia, endogenous hyperestrogenism.

Diagnosis
Myelophthisis is likely if there is bicytopenia or pancy­
topenia (anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia)
with circulating neoplastic cells, or evidence of systemic
infection (e.g. fungal or protozoal organisms seen in
blood smears or in tissue biopsies). Dacryocytes may be
observed on blood smears (Figure 16.33). However, defin­
itive diagnosis of an infiltrative process requires bone
marrow examination by both aspirate and core biopsies.
Bone marrow aspiration attempts on fibrotic marrow
usually produce ‘dry taps’ (e.g. blood alone without mar­
row particles). In such cases, bone marrow core biopsy is
diagnostic (Figure 16.34).

Management
Treatment is directed at the underlying cause of the cyto­
penia and may include immunosuppressive, antibiotic,
or antineoplastic therapy for idiopathic myelofibrosis,
infectious myelitis, or neoplasia, respectively. Supportive
care, including antibiotics, blood transfusions, anabolic

K22463_C016.indd 706

Figure 16.33 Dacryocyte (arrow) from the blood of a dog with
myelofibrosis.

steroids, and glucocorticoids, is often required in severe
cases. The condition may be reversible.

feline leukemia virus-associated anemia
Definition/overview
Anemia is a major non-neoplastic complication of FeLV
infection in cats. The anemia is variable in severity and
regenerative status, and is dependent on the underlying
mechanism.

Etiology
FeLV infects hematopoietic stem cells and the supporting
marrow stromal cells.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

16.34

707

Differential diagnosis
Lymphoma, systemic mycoses or other chronic inflam­
matory conditions, other viral infections, chronic kidney
disease.

Diagnosis

Figure 16.34 Bone marrow core section with trichrome stain
for collagen (in green). Note the tight fibrillar arrangement of
connective tissue, demonstrating myelofibrosis.

Pathophysiology
Most FeLV-associated anemias are nonregenerative. Mild
to moderate nonregenerative anemia may occur second­
ary to anemia of chronic disease. More severe nonregen­
erative anemia is expected with selective erythrocyte
hypoplasia, PRCA, erythroid leukemia, or neoplastic
myelophthisis. PRCA is associated with FeLV-C infec­
tion. When the virus infects erythroid precursors, it
may cause either selective erythroid precursor damage
(erythroid hypoplasia or PRCA) or neoplastic transfor­
mation of erythroid precursors. Erythroid neoplas­
tic transformation leads to proliferation of abnormal
erythroid cells with defective metabolism, function,
and proliferation. These dysfunctional neoplastic cells
fail to mature or prematurely die within the marrow,
resulting in ineffective erythropoiesis in the marrow
and anemia in the peripheral blood. Defective mito­
sis may cause macrocytic RBCs. Approximately 10%
of FeLV-associated anemias are regenerative. Virusinduced immune s­uppression may allow secondary
­hemoplasmosis and infectious hemolytic anemia. FeLV
may induce expression of foreign antigens on erythro­
cyte surfaces, thereby i­nciting IMHA. Hemorrhage may
occur secondary to thrombocytopathia or suppressed
platelet production causing marked thrombocytopenia
(<50,000 platelets/μl).

Clinical presentation
Clinical presentation is dependent on the severity and
cause of the anemia. Affected cats with moderate to
marked nonregenerative anemia often exhibit a chronic
wasting disease characterized by pale mucous mem­
branes, lethargy, and anorexia.

K22463_C016.indd 707

Most FeLV-associated anemias are mild to severe,
­normocytic to macrocytic, normochromic, and nonregen­
erative or poorly regenerative. Nucleated erythrocytes
in circulation with inadequate RBC regeneration (inap­
propriate metarubricytosis) or nucleated erythrocytes
with asynchronous maturation (megaloblasts) may be
noted. Concurrent neutropenia and thrombocytopenia
occur with aplastic anemia, leukemia, or myelophthi­
sis. Bone marrow findings vary from PRCA to erythroid
hypoplasia to erythroid neoplasia (myelodysplastic syn­
drome or acute myeloid leukemia-M6). Concurrent find­
ings with regenerative anemia may include hemotropic
mycoplasma infection or marked thrombocytopenia.­
A definitive FeLV association is diagnosed with positive
ELISA or IFA tests.

Management
Treatment will vary depending on the presence of
­concurrent conditions such as neoplasia, hemoplasmosis,
FIV infection, or FIP. Hematologic abnormalities due to
defective production are mostly irreversible. However, mar­
row hypoplasia may be cyclical, so temporary life support
may be considered during times of cytopenias. Supportive
care might include blood transfusions, antibiotics, appetite
stimulants, and anabolic steroids. FeLV-associated PRCA
may respond to immunosuppressive drugs.

Prognosis
Cats with PRCA often relapse with cessation of treatment,
whereas those with aplastic anemia typically do not
respond to treatment. Regardless of the cause, regener­
ative FeLV-associated anemias tend to respond favorably
to treatment.

ERYTHROID DYSPLASIA
bone marrow dyscrasia of poodles
Definition/overview
Bone marrow dyscrasia is a hereditary disorder of Toy
and Miniature Poodles characterized by erythrocyte mac­
rocytosis without anemia or reticulocytosis.

Etiology
The underlying etiology is unknown.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

708

Diseases of specific organ systems

Pathophysiology
Measurements of folate or vitamin B12 are normal, and
there is no response to therapeutic doses of vitamin B12.
The abnormality appears to originate from the bone mar­
row, as precursors are dysplastic.

Clinical presentation
There are no associated clinical signs, and the dysplastic
findings are usually incidental.

Differential diagnosis
Myelodysplastic syndrome, drug-induced dysplasia, vita­
min deficiency dysplasia, causes of regenerative anemia.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the breed and hematologic find­
ings of normal PCV and reticulocyte results, macrocytosis
(MCV >80 fl), inappropriate metarubricytosis with meg­
aloblasts, Howell–Jolly bodies, and neutrophil hyperseg­
mentation and gigantism (Figure 16.35).

Management

the blood–brain barrier in larger amounts than in older
animals. Dietary calcium may increase lead absorption.

Etiology
Causes of lead poisoning include lead shot, especially if
it is embedded in tissue in or near joints, and ingestion
of lead-containing paint, linoleum, plumbing solder, and
window caulking.

Pathophysiology
This condition causes a mild anemia in some cases, pos­
sibly due to increased RBC fragility and abnormal eryth­
ropoiesis. Lead primarily affects heme synthesis, causing
defective maturation.

Clinical presentation
Most clinical signs involve lethargy, anorexia, and GI
(vomiting and diarrhea) and neurologic (hysteria and sei­
zures) disturbances. Other signs include blindness, poly­
uria, polydipsia, abdominal pain, aggression, dementia,
pica, megaesophagus, and coma.

Treatment is not required.

Differential diagnosis

Prognosis
The dyscrasia does not have any negative clinical effects.

Iron deficiency, FeLV infection, drug toxicosis, neu­
rologic disorders, GI disorders, splenic neoplasia (e.g.
hemangiosarcoma).

lead poisoning

Diagnosis

(See also Chapter 20: Clinical toxicology.)

Definition/overview
Young animals are particularly susceptible to lead
­poisoning because it is absorbed quickly and may cross
16.35

Diagnosis is often based on a history of exposure to lead
and increased lead concentrations in heparinized blood.
The most consistent hematologic findings are nucleated
RBCs with normal or slightly decreased PCV and no RBC
regeneration (54% of cases have inappropriate metaru­
bricytosis). When present, the anemia is often normocytic
and normochromic, but may be microcytic and hypochro­
mic. Basophilic stippling is present in 25% of dogs with
lead poisoning (Figure 16.36). Bone marrow aspirates or
core biopsies are characterized by maturation arrest at
the metarubricyte stage.

Management
Treatment involves removal of the source of lead, includ­
ing surgical removal of GI foreign bodies, and adminis­
tration of calcium EDTA diluted to 10 mg/ml using 5%
dextrose (25 mg/kg SC q6h for 5 days). If initial blood
lead levels are high (>100 μg/dl), then a second chelation
treatment should be considered to reduce concentrations
below 40 μg/dl.
Figure 16.35 Blood from a Poodle with marrow dyscrasia
demonstrating a hypersegmented neutrophil, inappropriate
metarubricytosis, and nuclear fragments within erythrocytes. The
MCV was 99.1 fl (reference range, 66.4–77.4) without reticulocytosis.

K22463_C016.indd 708

Prognosis
Despite dramatic clinical signs, reported mortality rates
are low (5.6–15%) in treated dogs.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

16.36

709

Clinical presentation
Dehydrated patients may present with tacky mucous
membranes and prolonged CRTs and skin tents. Animals
with epinephrine-induced physiologic response are often
young, healthy animals that are easily excited.

Differential diagnosis
Causes of absolute erythrocytosis (heart disease, chronic
pulmonary disease, hyperthyroidism, renal neoplasms,
nonrenal neoplasms, PV, acute erythroid leukemia).

Diagnosis
Figure 16.36 Basophilic stippling in a nucleated erythrocyte
from a dog with lead poisoning.

ERYTHROCYTOSIS
Erythrocytosis is an increased RBC concentration in
peripheral blood that is detected by an increased PCV,
Hct, RBC count, or Hgb concentration. Erythrocytosis
may be relative (i.e. there is hemoconcentration or redis­
tribution of RBCs in circulation) or absolute, indicating
that there is an increased RBC mass due to increased RBC
production. Absolute erythrocytosis is further classified
as primary or secondary. If the erythroid proliferation
is independent of EPO levels, then the absolute erythro­
cytosis is primary, or an erythroid neoplasm. Secondary
absolute erythrocytosis is characterized by EPO-induced
erythroid hyperplasia. Polycythemia is sometimes used
interchangeably with erythrocytosis, but is also used to
indicate an absolute erythrocytosis. Polycythemia vera
(PV) is a neoplastic proliferation of hematopoietic cells
that produces mature erythrocytes.

Diagnosis is based on the CBC, history, and physical exam­
ination. The hemogram indicates a red cell mass (PCV, Hct,
Hgb, and/or RBC) that exceeds the normal reference range
for that species or breed. Greyhounds normally have a
high PCV of 0.6 l/l (60%). Highly concentrated urine, azo­
temia, and concurrent increases in serum total protein,
sodium, and chloride concentrations may be present
with dehydration. Epinephrine release may also cause
an excitement leukogram (mild mature neutrophilia and
lymphocytosis), thrombocytosis, and hyperglycemia.

Management
Dehydrated patients may require fluid therapy. Treatment
is not necessary for excitement-induced erythrocytosis, as
the response often declines within 30 minutes.

secondary absolute erythrocytosis
Definition/overview

relative erythrocytosis

Secondary erythrocytosis involves overproduction of
EPO or an EPO-like substance. The erythrocytosis is
appropriate if it is in response to hypoxia and inappropri­
ate if oxygen transport and tissue utilization are normal.

Definition/overview

Etiology

The increased RBC concentration is due to redistribution
of fluid or RBCs.

Etiology
Etiologies include dehydration, excitement, and endo­
toxic shock.

Pathophysiology
Fluid loss from the blood vessels causes a relative increase
in the proportion of RBCs. Fluid may be lost from the body
with dehydration or shifted into the interstitial tissues
with endotoxic shock. The spleen contracts during an
excitement/physiologic response to epinephrine, releas­
ing erythrocytes from the splenic sinusoids into periph­
eral circulation.

K22463_C016.indd 709

Causes of secondary appropriate erythrocytosis include
hypoxia (e.g. caused by high altitude, chronic pulmonary
disease, cardiac disease with right-to-left shunting, hyper­
thyroidism, or chronic methemoglobinemia). Secondary
inappropriate erythrocytosis is caused by tumors that
produce erythropoietin (e.g. renal lymphoma, renal
carcinoma, and renal fibrosarcoma) and renal disease
(e.g. pyelonephritis).

Pathophysiology
As a physiologically appropriate response to hypoxia,
EPO production is stimulated in cardiopulmonary dis­
orders. When the hypoxic stimulation is absent, an
inappropriate production of EPO or EPO-like substance
occurs related to tumor development or renal disease.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

710

Diseases of specific organ systems

Marked erythrocytosis can cause blood hyperviscosity
and, subsequently, poor tissue perfusion.

Clinical presentation
Signs may be acute despite the chronic nature of the
disorder. Initial findings are dependent on the initiat­
ing disease and the presence of hyperviscosity. Findings
directly resulting from the erythrocytosis may include
erythema, splenomegaly, and bright red mucous mem­
branes. Clinical signs associated with hyperviscosity
include functional abnormalities of the CNS and hemor­
rhage (epistaxis, hyphema, or GI bleeding).

Differential diagnosis
PV, relative erythrocytosis.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of hypoxia is based on history and evidence of
lung disease, right-to-left shunting heart disease, hyper­
thyroidism, or renal disease. Urinalysis, radiography,
ultrasonography, or biopsy can exclude renal disease.
Serum total thyroxine can identify hyperthyroidism.
Serum EPO levels are currently measured by radioimmu­
noassay and ELISA methods.

Management
Treatment of secondary erythrocytosis often involves
removal of the inciting cause (e.g. ­nephrectomy). Phlebot–
omy is indicated if there are signs of hyperviscosity.

METHEMOGLOBINEMIA
Definition/overview
Methemoglobin may be produced in amounts that exceed
normal protective antioxidant mechanisms. This form of
Hgb is unable to bind and carry oxygen. Normal amounts
are generally <1% of Hgb.

Clinical presentation
Clinically, the mucous membranes appear blue–gray
or c­yanotic (Figure 16.37) if methemoglobin levels
exceed 0.2 l/l (20%). The patient is often dyspneic, weak,
and ataxic when the methemoglobin content exceeds
0.5 l/l (50%).

Differential diagnosis
Causes of multisystemic hypoxia without anemia (e.g. pul­
monary disease, right-to-left cardiac shunts), causes of
hemolytic anemia (e.g. IMHA, hemoplasmosis, babesiosis).

Diagnosis
The appearance of dark red or chocolate-colored blood,
even after exposure to air, is diagnostic for the condition
and is readily visible by a spot test on filter paper. When
normal blood is exposed to air it becomes bright red,
while the blood of affected animals remains dark red if
the methemoglobin content exceeds 10% (Figure 16.38).
Methemoglobin content is measured by spectrophotom­
etry by a CO-oximeter or at specialized laboratories; the
pulse oximeter cannot cannot detect methemoglobinemia.
Other erythrocyte changes may include mild secondary
polycythemia in animals with methemoglobin reductase
deficiency, or regenerative anemia, Heinz bodies, and
eccentrocytes in animals with oxidant-induced hemolytic
anemia.

Management
Treatment is similar to that for Heinz body anemia.
The source of oxidant should be removed with emet­
ics if recent ingestion has occurred. For acetamino­
phen (paracetamol)-­
induced toxicity, acetylcysteine
(Mucomyst®) is given initially IV at 140 mg/kg of a 5%
solution diluted with saline, and then 70 mg/kg (of a 5%

16.37

Etiology
Methemoglobinemia occurs most commonly from expo­
sure to oxidative agents mentioned under Heinz body
formation (p. 695). Rarely, a hereditary deficiency of met­
hemoglobin reductase (cytochrome-b5 reductase) may
cause methemoglobinemia. The latter has been docu­
mented in several dog breeds and a DSH cat.

Pathophysiology
The erythrocyte antioxidant pathways are overwhelmed,
which results in heme oxidation from the ferrous (Fe2+) to
the ferric (Fe3+) state. Hemoglobin within the ferric state
is termed methemoglobin and is unable to bind ­oxygen,
producing a state of hypoxia.

K22463_C016.indd 710

Figure 16.37 This cat with methemoglobinemia as a result of
acetaminophen toxicity has blue–gray gums. (Courtesy S. Ford)

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

16.38

711

Note: When attempting to distinguish the cause of
the neutrophilia as inflammation or noninflammatory
(excitement or stress), the presence of one or more of
the following observations supports an inflammatory
etiology: neutrophilia >2–3 times the upper reference
­
limit, presence of left shift, or neutrophil toxicity.
Figure 16.38 Two tubes of
blood recently exposed to air.
The tube on the left remains
a dark color compared with
normal blood in the right tube,
indicating methemoglobinemia.
(Courtesy J. Harvey)

physiologic neutrophilia
Definition/overview
Physiologic (excitement or shift) neutrophilia is a tran­
siently increased neutrophil concentration associated
with epinephrine release during a fight or flight response.

Etiology
solution) q4h for 3–5 treatments. In addition, sodium
ascorbate (vitamin C) may further reduce methemoglo­
bin levels. A dose of 100–500 mg/day IV is recommended
for dogs, and a dose of 100 mg/day IV is recommended for
cats (see Chapter 20). Therapy is usually not required for
animals with the reductase enzyme deficiency.

LEUKOCYTE DISORDERS
(NON-NEOPLASTIC)
LEUKOCYTOSIS
Leukocytosis is an increased concentration of the collec­
tive white blood cell (WBC) concentration above its ref­
erence interval. It does not distinguish which leukocyte
type is increased.
Note: Some hematology analyzers (e.g. impedance
analyzers) cannot distinguish nucleated RBCs (nRBCs)
from WBCs. Therefore, the WBC count represents the sum
of WBCs and nRBCs, and should be considered the total
nucleated cell count (TNCC) in these cases. If a metaru­
bricytosis is present, the corrected WBC (cWBC) count can
be calculated using the TNCC and a blood smear quanti­
fication of nRBCs (nRBCs/100 WBCs): cWBC = TNCC × 100/
(100 + nRBCs/100 WBCs).

neutrophilia
Neutrophilia is defined as a neutrophil ­
concentration
above the upper reference interval, which is generally
>11,500/µl in the dog and >12,500/µl in the cat. Common
causes of neutrophilia are excitement, stress, and
­inflammation, whereas uncommon to rare causes include
paraneoplastic syndromes, myeloid leukemia, and canine
leukocyte adhesion deficiency (CLAD).

K22463_C016.indd 711

Epinephrine is released during times of morbid fear,
strenuous exercise, or excitement.

Pathophysiology
There are two leukocyte pools within blood, one that is
adhered to endothelial cells (marginal pool) and one that
is free flowing and not adhered to endothelial cells (cir­
culating pool). The circulating pool is sampled during a
blood draw, but the marginal pool is not. In dogs, there
are equal numbers of marginal and circulating neutro­
phils, whereas cats have three times more neutrophils
in the marginal pool relative to the circulating pool.
Epinephrine release causes decreased adherence of leu­
kocytes to endothelial cells, causing neutrophils and lym­
phocytes to shift into the circulating pool. The effect is
more common and greater in cats, in which a three-fold
increase may occur compared with a two-fold increase in
dogs. There is no left shift associated with this response.
Cell counts return to normal within 30 minutes.

Clinical presentation
Physiologic neutrophilia is most common in young,
healthy cats. Physical signs of excitement may be
observed in the waiting or examination room.

Differential diagnosis
Inflammation, corticosteroid-induced conditions.

Diagnosis
Concurrent abnormalities attributed to epinephrine
release include relative erythrocytosis, lymphocytosis,
thrombocytosis, and hyperglycemia. If a physiologic
response is suspected, blood counts should be repeated
after the animal has adjusted to the surroundings. The
presence of a left shift or toxicity in neutrophils supports
an inflammatory etiology.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

712

Diseases of specific organ systems

Management
Removing the animal from the environmental stim­
ulus should suppress the excitement response within
30 minutes.

corticosteroid-induced neutrophilia
Definition/overview
The neutrophilia may be related to exogenous adminis­
tration or endogenous release of glucocorticoids or ACTH.

Etiology
The neutrophilia may be secondary to stress, hyperadre­
nocorticism (Cushing’s syndrome), or exogenous adminis­
tration of glucocorticoids or ACTH.

Pathophysiology
Neutrophils shift from the marginal to the circulating
pool and are released from the bone marrow storage pool.
The magnitude and duration of the effect depend on the
type of corticosteroid given. After a single dose of pred­
nisone, neutrophil counts will rise within 4–8 hours and
return to baseline within 24 hours.

Clinical presentation
Signs will reflect the underlying condition. Hair loss,
polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, swollen abdomen, and
recurrent bacterial infections are often present with
hyperadrenocorticism.

Differential diagnosis
Physiologic neutrophilia, inflammation.

Diagnosis
History and physical examination findings are consistent
with an underlying, stress-inducing disease or hyperadre­
nocorticism. The neutrophilia is typically mild without a
left shift, although minimal left shifts rarely occur in dogs.
Lymphopenia is the most consistent laboratory finding,
but eosinopenia, monocytosis, and hyperglycemia may
also occur. Hypersegmented neutrophils may be seen with
hyperadrenocorticism or exogenous glucocorticoid admin­
istration. Dogs may have increased serum ALP activity.

Management

inflammation. The main indicators of inflammation are
increased numbers of immature neutrophils in the
blood, termed a left shift, and neutrophil toxicity.
A marked inflammatory neutrophilia that exceeds 50,000
­neutrophils/µl is called a leukemoid response.

Etiology
The etiology can involve infectious or noninfectious sources.
Infectious agents include bacteria, fungi, protozoa, or rick­
ettsiae. Noninfectious conditions involve tissue necrosis
such as necrotizing pancreatitis, neoplasia, thrombosis,
and burns. A leukemoid response may be associated with
IMHA, pancreatitis, pyelonephritis, pyometra, peritonitis,
pneumonia, hepatozoonosis, and malignant neoplasms
with necrotic centers, especially carcinomas. Canine gran­
ulocytopathy syndrome is a rare condition of Irish Setter
dogs characterized by recurrent ­life-­threatening bacterial
infections, pyrexia, and leukemoid response with impaired
neutrophil bactericidal activity.

Pathophysiology
Inflammatory conditions produce cytokines, such as
­granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and gran­
ulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF),
which promote release of neutrophils from the bone
­marrow and stimulate granulopoiesis.

Clinical presentation
Sites of inflammation may be apparent from physical
examination or diagnostic procedures. Signs will reflect
the underlying condition. Pyrexia is often present.

Differential diagnosis
Physiologic neutrophilia, corticosteroid-induced neutro­
philia, hematopoietic leukemia.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of inflammatory neutrophilia is based on a
careful history and CBC evaluation. The most specific
hematologic indicators of inflammation are the presence
of a left shift or neutrophil toxicity.

Management
Treatment will depend on the inciting cause.

Treatment should be aimed at the underlying cause.

other causes of neutrophilia

inflammatory neutrophilia

Paraneoplastic neutrophilia is caused by production of
G-CSF by neoplasms, such as rectal adenomatous polyp,
renal tubular carcinoma, and fibrosarcoma. CLAD is a
genetic disorder characterized by marked neutrophilia
and recurrent, life-threatening infections due to the

Definition/overview
Inflammation causes increased mobilization of neu­
trophils from the bone marrow to the site of tissue

K22463_C016.indd 712

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

713

inability of neutrophils to exit blood vessels and enter
tissues. Both paraneoplastic neutrophilia and CLAD tend
to produce neutrophilias that exceed 50,000/μl.

including feline eosinophilic granuloma complex and
canine eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy.

eosinophilia

T cell-dependent eosinophils are associated with parasitic
infections and hypersensitivities. This type of eosinophilia
is mediated by soluble factors, especially IL-5 and GM-CSF.
The production of IgE causes mast cell degranulation and
release of chemical mediators that attract eosinophils.

Eosinophils are identified by pink–orange ­cytoplasmic
granules that are round and variably sized in dogs and
small and rod-shaped in cats. In some Greyhounds,
Golden Retrievers, and Shetland Sheepdogs, and, rarely,
cats, eosinophils may have granules that do not stain
with Romanowsky stains and are termed gray eosino­
phils (Figure 16.39). Eosinophilia is defined as an eosin­
ophil concentration above the upper reference interval,
which is generally >1,250/µl in the dog and >1,500/µl in
the cat. Non-neoplastic eosinophilia is due to inflamma­
tion, hypoadrenocorticism, or paraneoplastic response.

inflammatory eosinophilia

Pathophysiology

Clinical presentation
Signs reflect the organ systems affected, such as skin
rashes, diarrhea, coughing, and scratching.

Differential diagnosis
Hypoadrenocorticism,
paraneoplastic
hypereosinophilic syndrome, leukemia.

eosinophilia,

Diagnosis

Definition/overview
Eosinophilia may be seen with tissue parasitism or aller­
gic (hypersensitivity) disorders.

Etiology
Peripheral eosinophilia may result from infiltration of the
skin, respiratory tract, and alimentary tract by such par­
asites as Ancylostoma spp., Trichuris vulpis, Toxocara canis,
Dirofilaria immitis (see Figure 16.23), Acanthocheilonema
(formerly Dipetalonema) reconditum, Aelurostrongylus
abstrusus, Eucoleus (formerly Capillaria) spp., Filaroides
spp., and Paragonimus kellicotti. Hypersensitivity reac­
tions can occur from the effects of fleas, food, grasses,
and nonspecific allergens. Many idiopathic eosinophilic
conditions are thought to be hypersensitivity reactions,
16.39

Diagnosis of parasitism or hypersensitivities includes
history, physical examination, food trials, skin tests,
serology (e.g. heartworm antigen test), and evaluations
of blood smears for microfilaria (see Figure 16.23), fecal
floats and sediment, tracheobronchial washes, and cyto­
logic or histologic biopsies.

Management
Treatment is aimed at the underlying cause. Treatment
for allergic conditions usually involves elimination of the
allergen, along with antihistamine and glucocorticoid
administration.

hypoadrenocorticism (addison’s disease)
(See also Chapter 11: Endocrine disorders.)

Definition/overview
Glucocorticoids (e.g. cortisol) and mineralocorticoids
(e.g. aldosterone) are hormones produced by the adrenal
cortex. Deficient production of these hormones leads to
hypoadrenocorticism. Eosinophilia is present in 20% of
dogs with hypoadrenocorticism.

Etiology
Hypoadrenocorticism in dogs is typically a result of
immune-mediated destruction of the adrenal cortex.
Pituitary disease causing ACTH deficiency is uncommon.

Pathophysiology
Figure 16.39 Canine eosinophil with poorly staining granules
(gray eosinophil).

K22463_C016.indd 713

The pathophysiology of eosinophilia is not completely
known, but probably involves cortisol deficiency.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

714

Diseases of specific organ systems

Clinical presentation

Differential diagnosis

Young to middle aged dogs (mean, 4 years; range, 4 months
to 14 years) are predisposed, especially Standard Poodles,
Portuguese Water Dogs, and Nova Scotia Duck Tolling
Retrievers. Animals are often presented for anorexia, vom­
iting, lethargy, depression, weakness, weight loss, diarrhea,
shivering or shaking, polyuria, polydipsia, and/or abdomi­
nal pain. There may be weight loss, fasting hypoglycemia, GI
hemorrhage, dehydration, bradycardia, and weak femoral
pulses. More severe signs of aldosterone deficiency include
hypovolemic shock, collapse, and severe dehydration.

Inflammation, hypoadrenocorticism, hypereosinophilic
syndrome, leukemia.

Differential diagnosis

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of a paraneoplastic eosinophilia requires nor­
malization or reduction of the eosinophil concentration
in response to tumor removal.

Management
Treatment will reflect the underlying disease and may
include surgery, radiation therapy, or chemotherapy.

Inflammation, paraneoplastic eosinophilia, hypereosino­
philic syndrome, leukemia

hypereosinophilic syndrome in cats

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is often based on history, physical examina­
tion findings, and blood tests for electrolytes and basal
and post-ACTH cortisol levels. The most consistent hema­
tologic abnormality is lack of a stress leukogram in a
clinically ill animal. Less frequently, lymphocytosis and
eosinophilia are observed.

Hypereosinophilic syndrome is an uncommon form of
peripheral eosinophilia in cats accompanied by severe
infiltration of eosinophils into many organs, often includ­
ing the GI tract, liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and lung. It is
difficult to differentiate from chronic eosinophilic leuke­
mia, and at least in human medicine, it is now considered
a form of chronic leukemia.

Management

Etiology

Acute cases of hypoadrenocorticism are treated with
appropriate IV fluids, along with administration of gluco­
corticoids and mineralocorticoids.

The etiology is unknown.

paraneoplastic eosinophilia
Definition/overview

Definition/overview

Pathophysiology
There is often evidence of intestinal thickening and
involvement of the bone marrow that resembles leuke­
mia of well-differentiated eosinophils. Counts have been
reported to exceed 50,000/µl (Figure 16.40).

Paraneoplastic syndromes are disorders caused by neo­
plasms, but are not a direct result of the physical presence
of the tumor in the organ or tissue.

16.40

Etiology
Tumor-associated eosinophilia has been reported in dogs
with fibrosarcoma, anaplastic mammary carcinoma,
T-cell lymphoma, or mast cell tumors, as well as in cats
with mast cell tumors or lymphoma.

Pathophysiology
Tumor production and release of GM-CSF, IL-5, histamine,
or chemotactic mediators enhance eosinophilopoiesis.

Clinical presentation
Signs reflect the organ systems affected by the neoplasm
and often involve one or more tissue masses in the skin,
lymphatic system, or urogenital system.

K22463_C016.indd 714

Figure 16.40 Blood from a cat with hypereosinophilic
syndrome. Note the four eosinophils and one neutrophil
(far left).

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs may include anorexia, weight loss, fever,
vomiting, diarrhea, and lymphadenopathy. Death results
from organ dysfunction caused by tissue infiltration.

Differential diagnosis
Inflammation, paraneoplastic eosinophilia, eosinophilic
leukemia.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, pres­
ence of multisystemic involvement, and ruling out other
causes of eosinophilia with fecal examination, diagnostic
imaging, and heartworm testing. Bone marrow evalua­
tion establishes the number of eosinophil precursor cells
and the degree of marrow involvement. Tissue biopsies
show eosinophilic infiltrates.

Management
Prednisolone (1–3 mg/kg PO q12h), with or without
hydroxyurea (7.5 mg/kg PO q12h), has been used to reduce
eosinophil numbers and clinical signs.

Prognosis
Cats often respond poorly to chemotherapy for long-term
control.

basophilia
Basophilia is defined as an increased blood basophil
concentration above the upper reference interval, gen­
erally >200/µl in the dog and cat. With the exception of
hypoadrenocorticism and hypereosinophilic syndrome,
non-neoplastic causes of basophilia are similar to those
for eosinophilia: inflammation due to parasitic infections
or hypersensitivities, and paraneoplastic basophilia due
to mast cell neoplasia or other malignancies. Marked
basophilia with atypical leukocytes in the circulation or
bone marrow should suggest basophilic leukemia.
It is important to note that basophil granules in dogs
and cats stain poorly. In these cases the cells may be mis­
taken for toxic neutrophils in dogs or faded eosinophils in
cats. In addition, basophilia must be distinguished from
circulating mast cells in the dog.

lymphocytosis
Lymphocytosis is an increased concentration of lympho­
cytes in blood, usually >4,800/µl in the dog and >7,000/µl
in the cat. Young animals within the first year of life

K22463_C016.indd 715

715

typically have higher lymphocyte concentrations
relative to adults, so appropriate reference intervals
­
should be used.
Note: The general classifications of lymphocytosis are
reactive (physiologic, chronic inflammation, hypoadreno­
corticism) and neoplastic. Reactive lymphocytosis tends
to be mild to moderate in severity (e.g. <15,000/μl in dogs
and <20,000/μl in cats), consists of lymphocytes of vary­
ing morphology, and normalizes when the underlying
disorder is appropriately treated. Neoplastic lymphocyto­
sis has varying presentations, but may be mild to marked
in severity, consist of a single lymphocyte morphol­
ogy, and persists without immunosuppressive or cancer
chemotherapy.

physiologic lymphocytosis
Definition/overview
Physiologic (excitement or shift) lymphocytosis is a tran­
sient lymphocytosis associated with epinephrine release
during a fight or flight response.

Etiology
Epinephrine is released during times of morbid fear,
strenuous exercise, or excitement.

Pathophysiology
Epinephrine release causes lymphocytes to shift from the
marginal pool to the circulating pool.

Clinical presentation
Physiologic lymphocytosis is most common in healthy,
young animals, especially cats. Affected animals appear
excited or have a history of strenuous muscular exertion.

Differential diagnosis
Chronic inflammation, hypoadrenocorticism, lymphoid
neoplasia.

Diagnosis
The lymphocytosis is typically less than two-fold above the
upper reference limit. Concurrent laboratory abnormal­
ities may include relative erythrocytosis, mature neutro­
philia, thrombocytosis, and hyperglycemia. If a physiologic
response is suspected, blood counts should be repeated
after the animal has adjusted to the surroundings.

Management
Removing the animal from the environmental stimulus
should suppress the excitement response.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

716

Diseases of specific organ systems

chronic inflammatory lymphocytosis
Definition/overview
Chronic antigenic or cytokine stimulation results in lym­
phoid hyperplasia.

Etiology
Chronic inflammation of an infectious or noninfectious
etiology can cause lymphoid hyperplasia and subsequent
lymphocytosis. In particular, lymphocytosis involving
intermediate-sized granular lymphocytes (Figure 16.41)
has been associated with Ehrlichia canis infection in dogs.
Modified live vaccines may also produce lymphocytosis
about 1 week post immunization.

(reactive lymphocytes) may be noted (Figure 16.42).
Hyperglobulinemia due to a polyclonal gammopathy
and plasma cell infiltration of tissues may also occur
(Figure 16.43). The presence of intermediate-sized lym­
phocytes characterized by abundant pale blue cytoplasm
with or without granules suggests T cell stimulation (see
Figure 16.41). Maximum lymphocytosis in extreme immune
reactions is usually <15,000/µl in dogs and <20,000/µl in cats.

Management
Treatment should be aimed at the underlying cause.

hypoadrenocorticism
(See also Chapter 11: Endocrine disorders.)

Pathophysiology
Antigen presenting cells, such as macrophages and
dendritic cells, process and present inciting antigens
to T lymphocytes. B cell development often requires co-­
stimulatory signals from T-helper cells, along with cyto­
kines, for activation and differentiation into plasma cells
that produce antibodies against the inciting antigen.

Definition/overview
Glucocorticoids (e.g. cortisol) and mineralocorticoids
(e.g. aldosterone) are hormones produced by the adre­
nal cortex. Deficient production of these hormones leads
16.42

Clinical presentation
Signs reflect the underlying inflammatory condition.

Differential diagnosis
Excitement, hypoadrenocorticism, lymphoid neoplasia.

Diagnosis
There is typically a mixed lymphoid population of small
and large lymphocytes of varying morphology. Slightly
enlarged lymphocytes with deeply basophilic cytoplasm
16.41

Figure 16.42 A reactive lymphocyte with a moderate amount
of deeply basophilic cytoplasm and a perinuclear pale zone
(Golgi apparatus).
16.43

Albumin

Gamma
Alpha-2

Beta

Alpha-1

Figure 16.41 Compared with a small lymphocyte (left), a
large granular lymphocyte (right) has a moderate amount of
basophilic cytoplasm containing several coarse pink–purple
granules.

K22463_C016.indd 716

Figure 16.43 Serum protein electrophoretic tracing with a
broad peak in the gamma region indicating the presence of a
polyclonal gammopathy in a case of canine ehrlichiosis.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

to hypoadrenocorticism. Lymphocytosis is present in
10–20% of dogs with hypoadrenocorticism.

Etiology
Hypoadrenocorticism in dogs is typically a result of
immune-mediated destruction of the adrenal cortex.
Pituitary disease causing ACTH deficiency is uncommon.

Pathophysiology

717

periods of time or enter tissues from the ­circulating pool.
Monocytes entering the tissues are transformed into mac­
rophages, which can persist for days to months. Myeloid
leukemia should be considered when monocyte counts
exceed 15,000/µl or immature monocytoid forms are
predominant.

corticosteroid-induced monocytosis

Corticosteroids cause lymphocytes to leave the circula­
tion and enter lymphoid tissues. A lack of glucocorticoids
inhibits this redistribution and allows lymphocyte num­
bers to increase in the circulation.

Definition/overview

Clinical presentation

Monocytosis may be secondary to stress, hyperadreno­
corticism (Cushing’s syndrome), or exogenous adminis­
tration of glucocorticoids or ACTH.

Animals present with lethargy, decreased tolerance to
stress, weakness, and GI symptoms such as anorexia,
vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. There may be
weight loss, fasting hypoglycemia, dehydration, bra­
dycardia, and weak femoral pulses. Vascular collapse is
possible because of impaired vascular compensation for
hypovolemia.

Differential diagnosis
Physiologic lymphocytosis, chronic inflammation, lym­
phoid leukemia.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is often based on history, physical examina­
tion findings, and blood tests for electrolytes and basal
and p
­ ost-ACTH cortisol levels. Lack of a stress leukogram
in a visibly ill dog is the most consistent hematologic
abnormality.

Management

Monocytosis can be induced by glucocorticoids, especially
in dogs.

Etiology

Pathophysiology
Monocytes shift from the marginal pool to the circulating
pool within the vasculature. The leukogram alterations
occur within 4–8 hours of a single dose of glucocorticoids
and counts return to baseline within 24 hours.

Clinical presentation
Signs will reflect the underlying condition. Hair loss,
polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, distended abdomen,
and recurrent bacterial infections are often present with
hyperadrenocorticism.

Differential diagnosis
Chronic inflammation, myeloid leukemia.

Diagnosis

Acute cases of hypoadrenocorticism are treated with
appropriate IV fluids, along with administration of gluco­
corticoids and mineralocorticoids.

Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and
diagnostic imaging; however, the presence of concurrent
mature neutrophilia, lymphopenia, and eosinopenia sug­
gests corticosteroid effects.

monocytosis

Management

Monocytosis is defined as a blood monocyte concen­
tration above the upper reference interval, generally
>1,350/µl in the dog and >850/µl in the cat. It most fre­
quently results from an increased demand for monocytes
and ­tissue macrophages, which function in the defense
against infectious agents, phagocytosis of damaged cells
and debris, and secretion of many important biologically
active molecules. Monocytes are not stored in the bone
marrow during production, but are immediately released.
However, they may marginate in blood vessels for short

K22463_C016.indd 717

Treatment is directed at the underlying disease. If exog­
enous glucocorticoids are the cause, readjustment of the
dose or cessation of administration should be considered.

chronic inflammatory monocytosis
Definition/overview
Monocytosis may occur with acute or chronic inflamma­
tion. However, the monocytosis associated with acute
conditions is secondary to stress, whereas chronic inflam­
matory monocytosis results from monocytic hyperplasia.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

718

Diseases of specific organ systems

16.44

Etiology
Inflammatory diseases that cause a high demand for
tissue macrophages may produce monocytosis. These
­
include immune-mediated disorders, tissue necrosis,
foreign body reactions, and mycobacterial or fungal
­
infections.

Pathophysiology
Inflammatory conditions produce cytokines, such as
GM-CSF, macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and IL-3,
which stimulates marrow production of monocytes.

Clinical presentation
Signs will reflect the underlying inflammatory condition.

Differential diagnosis

Figure 16.44 Mast cells are identified by dark purple
cytoplasmic granules and a round nucleus.

Corticosteroid-induced monocytosis, myeloid leukemia.

reactive mastocytemia

Diagnosis

Definition/overview

Other hematologic abnormalities with chronic inflamma­
tion may include neutrophilia, neutrophil left shifting,
toxic neutrophils, and lymphocytosis.

Non-neoplastic conditions that present with mast cells in
blood are termed mastocytemia.

Management

Mastocytemia in dogs is associated with inflammatory
disease (parvovirus enteritis, hypersensitivities, acute
pancreatitis), regenerative anemia, neoplasms other than
mast cell tumors, and trauma.

Treatment is aimed at the inciting cause.

mastocytemia
Mast cell precursors are produced in the bone marrow
as nongranular mononuclear cells. They travel through
peripheral blood to complete their maturation in tissues.
As such, mast cell precursors cannot be distinguished
from other mononuclear cells in blood. Mastocytemia
is therefore defined as the presence of mast cells in
peripheral blood, since the observance of any mast cells
in blood is abnormal. Hematology analyzers cannot
identify mast cells, so blood smear evaluation is imper­
ative to identify mastocytemia. Mast cells are identified
by the presence of purple cytoplasmic granules and
a round nucleus (Figure 16.44), and should be distin­
guished from basophils, which have segmented nuclei.
Methanolic Romanowsky stains are preferable to aque­
ous Romanowsky stains for identification of mast cells,
since their granules are soluble in the latter stains and
may not be visible. Mastocytemia typically indicates dis­
seminated mast cell neoplasia (systemic mastocytosis) in
cats, but most dogs with mastocytemia have disease other
than mast cell neoplasia. Feline mast cell neoplasms often
exhibit erythrophagocytosis.
Note: When present, mast cells tend to localize within
the feathered edge of the blood smear.

K22463_C016.indd 718

Etiology

Pathophysiology
It is suggested that inflamed tissues, such as the GI tract
or skin, may release these mast cells more readily than
normal.

Clinical presentation
Signs are dependent on the underlying disorder.

Differential diagnosis
Mast cell neoplasia.

Diagnosis
History, physical examination, diagnostic imaging, and
­tissue biopsies are necessary to rule out mast cell neoplasia.

Management
Treatment will reflect the underlying condition.

LEUKOPENIA
Leukopenia is a decreased concentration of all WBCs
combined. Leukopenia may be due to decreases in neu­
trophils or lymphocytes. Because of their normally

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

low concentrations in blood, decreases in monocytes,
eosinophils, or basophils tend not to cause leukopenia.
Monocytopenia and basopenia are not clinically signifi­
cant in dogs and cats.

Management

neutropenia

Definition/overview

Neutropenia is decreased blood neutrophils, often <3,000/µl
in the dog and <2,500/µl in the cat. It may result from
­excessive tissue demands, redistribution within the vas­
culature, peripheral destruction, or decreased production.
Note: Patients with neutrophil concentrations
<500–1,000/µl are at risk for secondary, life-­threatening
infection, termed neutropenic sepsis; prophylactic
administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics should be
considered in these cases.

inflammatory neutropenia
Definition/overview
Tissue utilization of neutrophils exceeds bone mar­
row production of neutrophils during times of severe
inflammation.

Etiology
Causes of severe inflammation are typically infectious,
and include gram-negative septicemia, severe enteritis,
systemic mycoses, and systemic protozoal infections.

Pathophysiology
Neutrophil migration into inflamed tissues exceeds the
release of neutrophils from the bone marrow.

Clinical presentation

719

Treatment is directed at the inciting cause.

redistribution neutropenia
Increased margination of circulating neutrophils can
result in neutropenia.

Etiology
Endotoxins from gram-negative sepsis produce a tran­
sient neutropenia.

Pathophysiology
After a single exposure to endotoxin, neutrophils rap­
idly shift from the circulating pool to the marginal
pool for 1–3 hours. The neutropenia is short lived since
­endotoxins also stimulate release of neutrophils from
the bone marrow, and neutropoiesis within the bone
marrow.

Clinical presentation
Signs of gram-negative infection include pyrexia,
anorexia, lethargy. However, given the peracute time
frame for the neutropenia, redistribution neutropenia is
often no longer present on presentation of the animal.

Differential diagnosis
Myelosuppression, severe inflammation, immune-­
mediated neutropenia, hemophagocytic syndrome, cyclic
hematopoiesis.

Diagnosis

Differential diagnosis

Diagnosis is based on history, complete physical exam­
ination, tests for infectious diseases, and cytology or his­
topathology of bone marrow. Sequential evaluation of the
leukogram may reveal a normal or increased neutrophil
concentration with or without signs of inflammation
(e.g. left shift, neutrophil toxicity).

Myelosuppression, endotoxemia, immune-mediated neu­
tropenia, hemophagocytic syndrome, cyclic hematopoiesis.

Management

Signs are often indicative of infectious disease, includ­
ing anorexia, pyrexia, and lethargy. Additional signs are
dependent on the affected tissues or organs.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on history, complete physical exam­
ination, tests for infectious diseases, and cytology or his­
topathology of bone marrow. The presence of a left shift
or neutrophil toxicity supports inflammation, but a mild
left shift or slight toxicity may be seen with other causes
of neutropenia. Sequential evaluation of the leukogram
should exclude cyclic or transient neutropenia.

K22463_C016.indd 719

Treatment for sepsis involves appropriate antibiotics.

peripheral destruction neutropenia
Definition/overview
Neutropenia may be due to immune targeting of
­neutrophil antigens (immune-mediated neutropenia) or
nonspecific destruction of hematopoietic cells by dysreg­
ulated phagocytes (hemophagocytic syndrome).

25/04/16 11:16 pm

720

Diseases of specific organ systems

Etiology
Drugs responsible for suspected immune-mediated neu­
tropenia include antithyroid drugs (e.g. thiouracil, methi­
mazole) and cephalosporins. Hemophagocytic syndrome
is caused by inappropriate activation of normal macro­
phages secondary to infectious (canine parvovirus, bacte­
rial sepsis, ehrlichiosis, blastomycosis, and Lyme disease),
neoplastic (lymphoid neoplasia and myelodysplastic syn­
drome), or immune-mediated (SLE) disease. Idiopathic
hemophagocytic syndrome has also been described.

Pathophysiology
The disorder may involve antibody directed against
surface antigens on the cell itself, or antibody directed
toward drug antigens attached to the neutrophil as an
‘innocent bystander’. Autoantibodies may also produce
defects in neutrophil function.

Clinical presentation
Signs may reflect those of immune-mediated, infectious,
or neoplastic diseases.

Differential diagnosis
Other immune-mediated hematologic disorders, SLE,
immune-mediated arthritis, neoplasia, drug-induced mye­
losuppression, severe systemic inflammation, endotox­
emia, hypersplenism, cyclic hematopoiesis, myelophthisis.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of immune-mediated neutropenia requires
detection of antineutrophil antibodies on the cells or in
serum. However, such assays are not widely available
and are not specific for immune-mediated neutrope­
nia. Immune-mediated neutropenia is more commonly
diagnosed by excluding other causes of neutropenia,
and demonstrating improvement with appropriate ther­
apy. Hemophagocytic syndrome may cause bicytopenia
or pancytopenia. Cytologic or histologic tissue biopsies
reveal many phagocytic macrophages. An underlying
disease may be identified with a complete diagnostic
work up, including physical examination, thoracic and
abdominal imaging, and fluid and tissue biopsies.

decreased production neutropenia
Definition/overview
Decreased neutrophil production may occur with certain
drugs, infectious agents, myelophthisis, and irradiation
that affect the bone marrow. It is diagnosed by demon­
strating bone marrow hypoplasia (Figure 16.45).

Etiology
Drugs that cause neutropenia due to myelotoxicity
include estrogens, chloramphenicol, t­
rimethoprim–
sulfadiazine, griseofulvin, and cancer chemotherapeutic
agents. Antineoplastic agents that can cause ­neutropenia
include cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil, busulfan,
mephalan, cisplatin, cytosine arabinoside, methotrex­
ate, mitoxantrone, doxorubicin, and hydroxyurea.
Cephalosporins and certain NSAIDs have been associated
with myelotoxicity. Reduced granulopoiesis may be asso­
ciated with such viruses as FeLV, FIP virus, feline pan­
leukopenia virus, and canine parvovirus. Ehrlichia canis
infection, when severe, may also cause bone marrow
hypoplasia. Leukemia, myelitis (systemic histoplasmo­
sis), or idiopathic myelofibrosis may cause myelophthisis.

Pathophysiology
Normal hematopoietic precursors may be crowded out
with myelophthisis. Irradiation, drugs, and infectious
agents destroy rapidly dividing precursor cells. Aplastic
anemia and myelofibrosis may be idiopathic.
Note: If there is generalized marrow injury, cells with
short circulating life spans decrease prior to those with

16.45

Management
Immune-mediated neutropenia may be resolved by
­stopping administration of the inciting drug and com­
mencing immunosuppressive therapy. Treatment for
hemophagocytic syndrome is directed at the inciting
disease.

K22463_C016.indd 720

Figure 16.45 Bone marrow histologic section showing the
hypocellularity and increased fat infiltration seen in conditions
such as myelosuppression.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

longer life spans. Neutrophils circulate for hours, ­platelets
circulate for days to weeks, and erythrocytes circulate
for months. Therefore, neutropenia often precedes other
cytopenias, but moderate to marked anemia is appreci­
ated for months after the initial insult.

Clinical presentation
Signs may include those due to severe neutropenia (severe
bacterial infections or sepsis) with or without signs of
marked thrombocytopenia (multisystemic hemorrhage)
and anemia (lethargy, pale mucous membranes). Other
signs reflect the animal’s underlying condition.

721

Pathophysiology
In gray Collies, cyclic differentiation of stem cells toward
committed lineages results in 11–14 day cycles of eryth­
rocyte, neutrophil, monocyte, and platelet production.
Decreases in blood neutrophil concentrations are most
prevalent given their shorter circulating life spans. Dogs
with nonhereditary cyclic hematopoiesis have variable
cycle lengths from 10–29 days. Cats infected with FeLV have
neutrophil cycle lengths reported to range from 8–16 days.

Clinical presentation

Clinical signs during neutropenic episodes include leth­
argy, pyrexia, anorexia, arthritis, keratitis, diarrhea, and
Differential diagnosis
respiratory infections. Affected Collies present with other
Cyclic hematopoiesis, severe systemic inflammation,
distinctive features such as abnormal hair pigmenta­
endotoxemia, hemophagocytic syndrome, immune-­ tion, bilateral scleral ectasia, enteropathy, and gonadal
mediated neutropenia.
hypoplasia.

Diagnosis

Differential diagnosis

Diagnosis of the underlying disorder may require a thor­
ough history and physical examination, blood tests for
viral disease and organ health (CBC, serum chemistry,
and urinalysis), diagnostic imaging, tissue biopsy, bone
marrow evaluation, and bacterial culture.

Severe systemic inflammation, noncyclic myelosuppres­
sion from drugs, infections, or irradiation, immune-­
mediated neutropenia, hemophagocytic syndrome,
endotoxemia.

Management

Diagnosis is based on history, signalment, clinical signs,
and cyclic decreases in cell counts. Carrier animals can be
determined only by test mating. All affected dogs have
a diluted coat color. Amyloidosis is commonly found in
many tissues.

Treatment requires cessation of myelotoxic drugs and
supportive care, particularly antibiotics. The use of
recombinant canine G-CSF (5 µg/kg SC q24h) has shown
promise in reducing the severity of drug-induced myelo­
suppression in the dog and cat. Specific treatment is
dependent upon the underlying disorder.

cyclic hematopoiesis
Definition/overview
Congenital cyclic hematopoiesis is an inherited autoso­
mal recessive disorder of gray Collies characterized by
periodic fluctuations in neutrophils and, to a lesser extent,
in monocytes, platelets, and reticulocytes. Nonhereditary
cyclic hematopoiesis may involve other breeds of dogs.
Cyclic neutropenia in cats has been associated with FeLV
infection.

Diagnosis

Management
Antibiotics and supportive care are necessary during
neutropenic cycles. Experimental treatment for dogs
with the ‘gray Collie syndrome’ involves bone marrow
transplantation and administration of lithium carbon­
ate (21–26 mg/kg/day) or recombinant canine G-CSF
(5 µg/kg/day). Cyclic neutropenia in FeLV-infected cats
can respond to prednisone.

Prognosis
Most affected dogs die within 6 months following chronic
recurrent infections.

Etiology

eosinopenia

The molecular basis of the genetic defect in dogs is
unknown, but seems to be associated with a defect in
the intracellular trafficking of neutrophil elastase. FeLV
infection is associated with cyclic neutropenia in cats.

Eosinopenia is defined as an eosinophil concentra­
tion less than the lower reference interval, generally
<100/µl in the dog. Since the cat may normally lack

K22463_C016.indd 721

25/04/16 11:16 pm

722

Diseases of specific organ systems

eosinophils, it is difficult to recognize reduced numbers.
Eosinopenia often results from decreased production or
redistribution.

corticosteroid-induced eosinopenia
Definition/overview
Eosinopenia can be induced by exogenous administra­
tion or endogenous release of glucocorticoids or ACTH.

Etiology
Eosinopenia may be secondary to stress, hyperadreno­
corticism (Cushing’s syndrome), or exogenous adminis­
tration of glucocorticoids or ACTH.

Pathophysiology

lymphopenia
Lymphopenia is defined as a blood lymphocyte
concentration less than the lower reference interval,
­
generally <1,000/µl in the dog and <1,500/µl in the cat.
Mechanisms include redistribution into lymphoid tissues,
decreased production, infection-induced destruction,
obstruction of lymph flow, and increased loss through
lymphatic vessel damage.

corticosteroid-induced lymphopenia
Definition/overview
Lymphopenia often accompanies stress, hyperadrenocor­
ticism, or exogenous glucocorticoid or ACTH administra­
tion. This is the most common cause of lymphopenia.

Implicated mechanisms are intravascular lysis, decreased
bone marrow release, enhanced margination, and reduced
bone marrow production. Eosinopenia occurs within
1–6 hours of a single dose of glucocorticoids and counts
return to baseline within 24 hours.

Etiology

Clinical presentation
Signs reflect the underlying condition. Hair loss, poly­
dipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, swollen abdomen, and
recurrent bacterial infections are often present with
hyperadrenocorticism.

The immediate effect of glucocorticoids is lymphocyte
redistribution to lymphoid tissues. Prolonged or high
doses of glucocorticoids cause lympholysis and lymphoid
hypoplasia. Lymphopenia is transient as cell counts return
to normal within 1–3 days following drug withdrawal.

Differential diagnosis

Clinical presentation

Generalized marrow hypoplasia or aplasia.

Signs reflect the underlying condition. Hair loss,
­polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, swollen abdomen, and
recurrent bacterial infections are often present with
hyperadrenocorticism.

Diagnosis
History and physical examination findings are consistent
with an underlying disease. Other leukogram changes
attributed to stress include neutrophilia without a left
shift, lymphopenia, and monocytosis. However, hema­
tologic evidence of inflammation (left shift, neutrophil
toxicity) may occur if the underlying disease is inflam­
matory. Hypersegmented neutrophils may be seen with
hyperadrenocorticism or exogenous glucocorticoid
administration. Dogs may have increased serum ALP
­
activity.

Management
Treatment is directed at the underlying disease. Levels
will normalize in one day after a single dose of cortico­
steroids is given.

K22463_C016.indd 722

Endogenous or exogenous corticosteroids produce an
absolute lymphopenia or a normal value reduced from a
previous lymphocytosis.

Pathophysiology

Differential diagnosis
Systemic infections, generalized lymphadenopathy, chy­
lothorax, lymphangiectasia, severe combined immuno­
deficiency (SCID).

Diagnosis
Other leukogram changes attributed to glucocorticoids
include neutrophilia without a left shift, eosinope­
nia, and monocytosis. However, concurrent inflamma­
tion (left shift, neutrophil toxicity) may be present.
Hypersegmented neutrophils may be seen with hyper­
adrenocorticism or exogenous glucocorticoid administra­
tion. Dogs may have increased serum ALP activity.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

Management
The underlying cause should be treated. If drug induced,
the dosage may be adjusted or stopped.

lymphoid hypoplasia
Definition/overview
Decreased lymphocyte production occurs with certain
viral infections, immunosuppressive drugs, generalized
lymphadenopathy, or whole body irradiation.

Etiology
Etiologies include viruses (CDV, FeLV, FIV, parvoviruses),
drugs (chemotherapeutics), generalized lymphadenitis
(systemic fungal infections), multicentric lymphoma, and
whole body irradiation.

Pathophysiology
There is direct lympholysis or lymphoid tissue destruction.

Clinical presentation
Signs reflect the affected organ systems.

Differential diagnosis
Corticosteroids, chylothorax, lymphangiectasia, SCID.

Diagnosis

Pathophysiology
Blocked lymph flow or lymph loss prevents lymphocyte
recirculation.

Clinical presentation
Signs are dependent on the underlying disease. Chylous
effusions typically cause dyspnea, and there will be a his­
tory of repeated effusion drainage. Signs associated with
PLE include weight loss and diarrhea.
Generalized lymphadenomegaly is expected with
lymphadenitis and multicentric lymphoma.

Differential diagnosis
Corticosteroids, viral infections, SCID.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and
laboratory and imaging tests. Chylous effusions are iden­
tified by body cavity fluid analysis. They tend to be white
with high triglyceride and lymphocyte concentrations.
Hypoproteinemia, hypocholesterolemia, and GI hemor­
rhage can occur with PLE; intestinal biopsy or empirical
therapy may reveal the underlying disease. Lymphoma
and systemic fungal infections are typically diagnosed
by cytologic or histologic biopsy of lymph nodes or other
diseased tissue.

Diagnosis of the underlying disease is based on history,
physical examination, serology for the specific viral
infections, and tissue biopsy.

Management

Management

severe combined immunodeficiency

Treatment is directed toward the underlying cause.

723

Treatment is directed at the underlying disease.

Definition/overview

Obstruction of lymph flow or loss of lymphatic fluid from
the body interferes with the recirculation of lymphocytes.

Congenital defects in lymphocyte development result in
lymphoid aplasia and subsequent marked ­lymphopenia
and hypoglobulinemia. The disease is rare, but has been
documented in Basset Hounds, Cardigan Welsh Corgis,
Jack Russell Terriers, and Frisian Water Dogs.

Etiology

Etiology

Lymph flow may be obstructed by generalized lymph­
adenitis (systemic fungal infections) or multicentric
lymphoma. Lymphocytes can be lost from the body with
repeated drainage of chylous effusions or through loss
of lymph into the GI tract with lymphangiectasia and
­protein-losing enteropathy (PLE).

The deficiency in Basset Hounds and Cardigan Welsh
Corgis is X-linked due to separate mutations in an IL
receptor. An autosomal recessive mode of inheritance
­
occurs in Jack Russell Terriers due to mutated DNAdependent protein kinase. Frisian Water Dogs have a
mutation of RAG1.

altered lymph flow
Definition/overview

K22463_C016.indd 723

25/04/16 11:16 pm

724

Diseases of specific organ systems

Pathophysiology
Defective lymphocyte development results in immune
incompetence, which becomes fatal when maternal anti­
bodies wane. There is depressed T cell function, low IgG
and IgA concentrations, and variable IgM concentrations.
Affected animals usually die from infectious disease.

Clinical presentation
Puppies may be small, thin, and inactive. Signs of recur­
rent infections occur as bacterial pyoderma and otitis
externa within the first 6 weeks of life. Mucopurulent ocu­
lar and nasal discharges are common. Lymphadenopathy
is not present. Death may occur within 50 hours of admin­
istering a modified live vaccine.

Differential diagnosis
Viral infections, PLE, exogenous corticosteroids.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the history of high morbidity and
mortality in puppies from the same breeding pair of dogs.
Affected puppies have lymphopenia, hypoglobulinemia,
and depressed T lymphocyte function. Necropsy reveals
profound lymphoid hypoplasia.

Management
Antibiotics may be administered, but death due to infec­
tious disease is expected. Bone marrow transplantation
is the only means to regain immune competence. Carrier
animals should not be bred.

Prognosis
Mortality occurs when maternal antibodies wane at
8–14 weeks of age.

ABNORMAL NUCLEAR MORPHOLOGY
inflammatory left shift
Definition/overview
A left shift is defined as an increase in immature neu­
trophils over the reference interval. Immature neutro­
phils include band neutrophils (bands), metamyelocytes,
myelocytes, and promyelocytes. The shift is considered
‘degenerative’ when immature neutrophils outnumber
segmented neutrophils or when a left shift occurs in the
presence of neutropenia. A degenerative left shift indi­
cates severe tissue inflammation that has overwhelmed
the bone marrow’s ability to produce neutrophils. Any
left shift that is not degenerative is termed ‘regenerative’,

K22463_C016.indd 724

meaning that neutropoiesis is able to meet or exceed
peripheral demand.

Etiology
A left shift is usually caused by a systemic inflammatory
lesion, such as in pyometra, pneumonia, large neoplasm,
or immune-mediated disorders (e.g. IMHA). A degener­
ative left shift is typically a result of severe infectious
disease.

Pathophysiology
Inflammatory cytokines (e.g. IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, GM-CSF, and
G-CSF) enhance neutrophil release from the bone marrow
into blood. Release is sequential in that bands enter the
blood before metamyelocytes and earlier stages. With
continued inflammation, cytokines stimulate neutrophil
production, taking 5–7 days for a myeloblast to mature
into a segmented form. A left shift may accompany acute
or chronic inflammation.

Clinical presentation
Signs reflect the affected organ system.

Differential diagnosis
Pelger–Huët anomaly, myelodysplastic syndrome, granu­
locytic leukemia.

Diagnosis
Blood smear evaluation shows increased numbers of
immature neutrophils, particularly band neutrophils
(Figure 16.46). Sites of inflammation can be determined
by history, physical examination, biochemical profile,
urinalysis, diagnostic imaging, and biopsies.

Management
Treatment is directed toward the underlying cause.

Prognosis
Animals with degenerative left shifts tend to have poorer
outcomes relative to those with regenerative left shifts.
Worsening of the left shift is a negative prognostic indica­
tor, whereas dampening or resolution of a left shift indi­
cates clinical improvement.

pelger–huët anomaly
Definition/overview
This non-neoplastic developmental abnormality is
an inherited disorder in dogs and cats involving all
granulocytes.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

16.46

725

16.47

Figure 16.46 Band neutrophils from a cat (left) and dog (right)
lack nuclear segments, and have slightly open chromatin. The
two feline neutrophils display cytoplasmic basophilia (toxicity).

Figure 16.47 Nuclei of neutrophils (top) and eosinophils
(bottom) fail to segment with Pelger–Huët anomaly. However,
the chromatin pattern is dense, indicating nuclear maturity.

Etiology

Management

Pelger–Huët anomaly is inherited in an autosomal domi­
nant manner due to a mutated lamin B receptor. Affected
dog breeds include, but are not exclusive to, Australian
Heelers, Australian Shepherd Dogs, Basenjis, Border Collies,
Cocker Spaniels, Coonhounds, German Shepherd Dogs, and
Samoyeds. It has been reported in one family of Domestic
Shorthair cats.

No treatment is necessary.

Pathophysiology

Prognosis
Leukocyte function in dogs is not impaired and there is
no predisposition to infection or immunodeficiency. The
homozygous condition found in the cat is lethal and may
be associated with skeletal deformities and increased
susceptibility to infection.

This condition is suggested to be a stem cell defect, since
megakaryocytes may also appear hyposegmented.

hypersegmentation

Clinical presentation

Definition/overview

Chondrodysplasia has been recognized in a stillborn
homozygous kitten. Heterozygote kittens may be still­
born or viable. Heterozygote dogs do not present with
signs of infection.

Hypersegmentation is defined as a neutrophil with more
than five nuclear segments, and it indicates aging or
dysplasia.

Differential diagnosis

Hypersegmentation is seen with delayed sample analy­
sis, glucocorticoid administration, hyperadrenocorticism,
hyperthermia (e.g. heat stroke, malignant hyperthermia),
CLAD, dysplastic processes (Poodle macrocytosis, vitamin
B12 deficiency), and myeloid leukemias.

Inflammatory left shift, myelodysplastic syndrome, gran­
ulocytic leukemia.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the appearance of blood leukocytes
that have mature chromatin (condensed, coarse, and
patchy) and nuclear shapes that reflect immaturity (band,
indented, or round) (Figure 16.47). The cytoplasm under­
goes normal maturation. Pelger–Huët anomaly is fre­
quently found during routine preoperative screening.
Note: The significance in diagnosing Pelger–Huët
anomaly is that it is not interpreted as a degenerative left
shift due to severe inflammation.

K22463_C016.indd 725

Etiology

Pathophysiology
Hypersegmentation occurs as part of the normal aging
process, and reflects a prolonged transit time in blood.
Dysplastic and neoplastic processes are due to abnormal
neutrophil maturation.

Clinical presentation
Signs reflect the underlying condition.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

726

Diseases of specific organ systems

Differential diagnosis
Hyperadrenocorticism, exogenous glucocorticoids, heat
stroke, malignant hyperthermia, CLAD, Poodle macrocyto­
sis, vitamin B12 (cobalamin) deficiency, myeloid leukemia.

staining contributes to the fine red granules known as
toxic granulation.

Clinical presentation
Signs reflect the site of inflammation or underlying
condition.

Diagnosis
Affected neutrophils present with five or more distinct
nuclear lobes on blood smears (Figure 16.48). Blood smears
should be made at the time of sample acquisition to pre­
vent in-vitro neutrophil aging and hypersegmentation.

Management

Differential diagnosis
EDTA storage artifact, lysosomal storage disease, granu­
lation syndrome in Birman cats, Chédiak–Higashi syn­
drome in cats.

Treatment is directed toward the underlying cause.

Diagnosis

ABNORMAL CYTOPLASMIC MORPHOLOGY

Neutrophil toxicity is diagnosed via blood smear eval­
uation (Figures 16.49a–d). Tests for specific infectious
agents and immune-mediated disorders may be indicated.

neutrophil toxicity

Management

Definition/overview

Treatment is directed toward the underlying illness.

In addition to a left shift, neutrophils may exhibit toxic
change during times of inflammation.

Prognosis

Etiology

Reduction of toxic changes implies a favorable prognostic
indicator.

Antibiotic responsiveness suggests a bacterial cause, but
toxic change may also be found in cases of sterile inflam­
mation or drug toxicity.

Pathophysiology
Toxic change is a result of a shortened maturation time or
direct toxic injury to developing neutrophils. Döhle bod­
ies represent lamellar aggregates of rough endoplasmic
reticulum. Persistent ribosomes cause diffuse cytoplas­
mic basophilia. Foamy cytoplasmic vacuolation occurs
with dispersed organelles. Enhanced primary granule
16.48

lysosomal storage diseases
Definition/overview
Lyosomal storage diseases are a group of inheritable
disorders caused by enzyme deficiencies that result in
intralysosomal accumulations of undigested molecules.
All these diseases are rare in dogs and cats.

Etiology
Lysosomal storage diseases produce granules or vacuoles
in leukocytes include fucosidosis, GM1 gangliosidosis,
GM2 gangliosidosis, alpha-mannosidosis, mucopolysac­
charidosis (MPS) I, MPS IIIB, MPS VI, and MPS VII.

Pathophysiology
As lysosomes become engorged with degradation mate­
rial they compress surrounding organelles and impair
cellular respiration and function. Waste products build
up and damage the cell.

Clinical presentation

Figure 16.48 Hypersegmented neutrophils in a dog with canine
leukocyte adhesion deficiency.

K22463_C016.indd 726

Signs will vary with the type of enzyme deficiency,
but may include failure to thrive, growth retardation,
seizures, ataxia, corneal clouding, hepatosplenomeg­
aly, cardiac murmurs, renal dysfunction, and skeletal
abnormalities.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

727

16.49

a

b

c

d

Figures 16.49a–d Signs of neutrophil toxic change include
diffuse cytoplasmic basophilia (a–c), cytoplasmic aggregates of
basophilia termed Döhle bodies (b, c), foamy cytoplasm (b, c),
and prominent pink primary granules or toxic granulation (d).

16.50

Figure 16.50 Vacuolated lymphocyte from a cat with
lysosomal storage disease, consistent with mannosidosis.

16.51

Differential diagnosis
EDTA storage artifact, toxic granulation, granulation
syndrome in Birman cats, Chédiak–Higashi syndrome
­
in cats.

Diagnosis
Cytoplasmic granules or vacuoles are present in leu­
kocytes depending on the type of enzyme deficiency
(Figures 16.50, 16.51). Storage diseases associated with
leukocyte inclusions include fucosidosis, GM1 ganglio­
sidosis, GM2 gangliosidosis, alpha-mannosidosis, MPS I,
MPS IIIB, MPS VI, and MPS VII. A urine spot test is used
to screen for glycosaminoglycans, while a cell enzyme
activity test is diagnostic. DNA-based tests are available
for some diseases with known mutations.

Management
Experimentally, bone marrow transplantation has been
used to treat some of these disorders. Affected animals
should not be bred.

Figure 16.51 Granulated neutrophils in a dog with
mucopolysaccharidosis I.

Etiology
The disorder is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner.

Pathophysiology

Prognosis

The pathophysiology is poorly understood, as neutrophil
ultrastructure and function are normal.

Without bone marrow transplantation, these diseases are
progressive and fatal.

Clinical presentation

abnormal neutrophil granulation in
birman cats
Definition/overview
Abnormal neutrophil granulation is a genetic anomaly
recognized in some Birman cats without associated clin­
ical disease.

K22463_C016.indd 727

There are no signs associated with this disorder.

Differential diagnosis
Toxic granulation, lysosomal storage disease.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the presence of fine, pink granules
within the cytoplasm of neutrophils (Figure 16.52).

25/04/16 11:16 pm

728

Diseases of specific organ systems

16.52

Figure 16.52 Fine pink granules (arrow) in a neutrophil from a
Birman cat.

Management
No treatment is required.

16.53

Figure 16.53 Feline Chédiak–Higashi syndrome presenting
as large lavender cytoplasmic structures (arrow) within
granulocytes. (Courtesy J. Harvey)

Management

feline chédiak–higashi syndrome

Supportive therapy (e.g. blood transfusions, antibiotics)
should be given as needed. Neutrophil chemotaxis has
been reported to improve following administration of
canine G-CSF in cats. Neutrophil and platelet function can
be restored with bone marrow transplantation.

Definition/overview

Prognosis

Feline Chédiak–Higashi syndrome is a rare, inherited dis­
order of blue-smoke Persian cats with yellow eye color.

Life expectancy can exceed 10 years.

Prognosis
There are no known negative effects.

Etiology
The disorder is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait
and caused by a mutant lysosomal docking protein, LYST.

Pathophysiology
Granule defects are present in leukocytes, melanocytes,
and platelets, leading to abnormal and enlarged lyso­
somal granules in leukocytes, decreased neutrophil che­
motaxis, bleeding diathesis, and oculocutaneous color
dilution.

Clinical presentation
Affected cats may be photophobic with cataract forma­
tion. There is increased bleeding time due to platelet
granule defects.

Differential diagnosis
Cytoplasmic toxicity, lysosomal storage disease.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on signalment, physical examination,
and characteristic large, pink to magenta neutrophil
granules (Figure 16.53) that are positive with peroxi­
dase and Sudan black B stains. Neutropenia may also be
present.

K22463_C016.indd 728

INFECTIOUS AGENTS
(See also Chapter 21: Infectious diseases.)
A variety of infectious agents may be found within leu­
kocytes during examination of the blood or bone marrow.
These include bacterial (Figures 16.54, 16.55), rickettsial,
protozoal (Figure 16.56), and fungal organisms, or CDV
inclusions (see Figure 16.32).

ehrlichiosis
Definition/overview
Disease is caused by a variety of rickettsial bacteria,
which are primarily transmitted by ticks.

Etiology
Causative agents in the dog include Ehrlichia canis,
Ehrlichia ewingii, Anaplasma phagocytophilum, and, rarely,
Ehrlichia chaffeensis. A. phagocytophilum and E. canis
appear to infect cats. Disease is commonly termed ehrli­
chiosis no matter which genus is causing infection.

Pathophysiology
In the acute phase of the disease, replication of the organ­
ism occurs within the leukocytes, with hematogenous
spread, vasculitis, and thrombocytopenia. In the chronic

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

16.54

729

phase of E. canis infection, there is an ineffective immune
response by the host leading to pancytopenia related to
hypoplasia of the bone marrow. Because of the long life
span of erythrocytes, thrombocytopenia and neutropenia
often occur before anemia.

Clinical presentation

Figure 16.54 Blood smear from a dog with sepsis showing
bacteria within a toxic neutrophil. Culture of the blood, liver,
and lungs grew Salmonella cholerasuis subspecies arizonae.

16.55

Acute signs include fever, anorexia, lethargy, lymphade­
nomegaly, hepatosplenomegaly, lameness, stiffness, and
joint swelling. More severe signs include hemorrhage
(e.g. epistaxis, melena, and petechiation), neurologic
signs, vomiting, diarrhea, coughing, and cardiac arrhyth­
mias. Emaciation may occur with chronic E. canis infec­
tion. Feline disease presents as vague illness with fever,
weight loss, lymphadenopathy, and tick infestation.
However, most clinical signs seen with canine ehrlichiosis
have also been identified in cats.

Differential diagnosis
Chronic inflammation, organ failure, other infectious
agents, drug-induced injury.

Diagnosis
Acute disease in dogs and cats most consistently causes
thrombocytopenia and mild nonregenerative anemia.
With chronic canine infection, hyperglobulinemia,
pancytopenia, or large granular lymphocytosis (see
Figure 16.41) is possible. The gammopathy is typically
polyclonal, but is rarely monoclonal. Blood smear evalua­
tion may show intracytoplasmic bacterial colonies (mor­
ulae) in mononuclear cells (E. canis and E. chaffeensis) or
granulocytes (E. ewingii or A. phagocytophilum) during
acute infection (Figure 16.57). Aspiration of enlarged
lymph nodes reveals reactive lymphoid hyperplasia,
and neutrophilic polyarthropathy is observed on syno­
vial fluid analysis. In the absence of visualizing morulae,

Figure 16.55 Circulating feline neutrophils with multiple
intracytoplasmic nonstaining linear shapes identified as
Mycobacterium spp.

16.56
16.57

Figure 16.56 Blood neutrophil containing a tachyzoite in a cat
with toxoplasmosis.

K22463_C016.indd 729

Figure 16.57 Ehrlichia ewingii morula in a canine neutrophil.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

730

Diseases of specific organ systems

diagnosis is best determined by positive or rising serum
titers. For canine infections, serologic screening tests
include an in-house ELISA test and IFA testing performed
at reference laboratories. Serologic titers by immunoblot
and DNA detection by PCR are confirmatory tests. In cats,
seropositivity by IFA is most commonly used, but some
cats may have low or negative titers.

gait, mucopurulent oculonasal discharge, weight loss,
polydipsia, polyuria, and bloody diarrhea. Signs often
wax and wane due to periodic release of merozoites.

Management

Diagnosis

The recommended treatment for canine or feline ehrli­
chiosis is doxycycline (10 mg/kg PO q24h for 28 days).
Clinical improvement is expected within 24–48 hours
after initiating therapy, but dogs with pancytope­
nia due to chronic E. canis infection do not respond to
treatment.

H. canis is classically diagnosed by blood smear eval­
uation, as gamonts are plentiful within blood neutro­
phils (Figure 16.58). Blood PCR tests are also available.
H. americanum should be suspected based on clinical
signs, marked neutrophilia (leukemoid response), and
the observance of chronic periosteal hypertrophic prolif­
eration on radiographs. In contrast to H. canis, only rare
gamonts are present in the blood (<0.1% of WBCs). Muscle
biopsy is the diagnostic standard, but schizonts may also
be observed within pyogranulomatous lesions of the
lung, liver, spleen, and lymph nodes. Serology using IFA
and blood PCR tests are also available.

hepatozoonosis
Definition/overview
This tick-borne disease of dogs, domestic cats, and wild
canids is found in Africa, Southern Europe, Italy, the
Middle East, Asia, and in the US Gulf Coast states from
Texas to Georgia. Infections in cats are found in India,
Africa, the Middle East, and California in the USA.

Etiology
The disease is caused by ingestion of Rhipicephalus
sanguineus ticks that are infested with the protozoan
organism Hepatozoon canis. Another species, Hepatozoon
americanum, is also prevalent in the USA and is transmit­
ted by Amblyomma maculatum.

Pathophysiology
Ingested ticks release sporozoites, which penetrate the
intestinal wall and are carried by blood and lymph to the
lungs, spleen, liver, or muscle, where cysts are formed.
The schizonts within the cyst develop into merozoites or
meronts, which eventually become gametocytes or gam­
onts that infect leukocytes or endothelial cells. Following
a blood meal containing infected leukocytes, the organism
develops into sporozoites within the tick. Development of
gametocytes in leukocytes takes 4–5 weeks from the time
of tick exposure.

Differential diagnosis
Other tick-borne diseases such as ehrlichiosis, multiple
myeloma, lymphoma.

Management
Treatment is aimed at improving clinical signs, as therapy
is not curative, and relapses are expected. H. canis infec­
tions are typically treated with imidocarb diproprion­
ate (5–6 mg/kg SC q2weeks) until gamonts are no longer
visible on blood smears for 2–3 consecutive months. It is
suggested that dogs with H. americanum infection receive
a triple combination of trimethoprim–­
sulfadiazine
(15 mg/kg PO q12h), clindamycin (10 mg/kg PO q8h), and
pyrimethamine (0.25 mg/kg PO q24h) for 14 days, or tol­
trazuril sulfone (10 mg/kg PO q12h) for 14 days. The triple
combination or toltrazuril sulfone is followed by 2 years

16.58

Clinical presentation
Tick infestation may be evident. Clinical signs of H. canis
infection range from subclinical to chronic, and severity
tends to correlate with the dog’s immune status. Signs of
overt disease include fever, lethargy, anorexia, depression,
and anemia. Hepatozoon americanum infection includes
additional signs of muscle atrophy, ­hyperesthesia, stiff

K22463_C016.indd 730

Figure 16.58 A large, ovoid, nonstaining Hepatozoon canis
gamont within a neutrophil.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

of decoquinate (10–20 mg/kg PO q12h). NSAIDs are indi­
cated to reduce pain.

leishmaniasis
Definition/overview
Leishmaniasis is an infrequent protozoal disease in dogs,
and is rarely found in cats. It is caused by Leishmania
spp. History usually indicates travel outside the US to
Mediterranean and Middle East countries (e.g. Greece, Spain,
or Italy). The disease is also present in Central and South
America and Asia. Endemic foci in Oklahoma and Texas
have been reported, as well as a research colony in Ohio.

Etiology
Sandflies are the vectors of Leishmania spp. Rodents and
dogs are the primary reservoirs for human infection, and
cats are probably incidental hosts.

Pathophysiology
The parasite produces visceral or cutaneous manifesta­
tions. Promastigotes are disseminated throughout the
body, likely within macrophages. Nonflagellate forms
called amastigotes develop and multiply within mac­
rophages, infecting new cells. Signs can develop from
3 months to 7 years after infection.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs in dogs develop over months and include
exercise intolerance, weight loss, lethargy, polydipsia,
anorexia, diarrhea, vomiting, polyphagia, epistaxis,
melena, sneezing, coughing, and fainting. Physical exam­
ination findings involve lymphadenopathy, alopecia,
ulcerative dermatitis, fever, cachexia, lameness, and con­
junctivitis. Cutaneous nodules are mostly seen in cats.

Differential diagnosis
Multiple myeloma, lymphoma, immune-mediated arthritis.

731

nodes, spleen, liver, kidney, and skin (Figure 16.59).
Amastigotes are recognized by the presence of a small
purple nucleus and a perpendicular rod-shaped kineto­
plast in Romanowsky-stained smears. Other tests include
tissue culture and detection of leishmanial DNA by PCR,
which has high diagnostic sensitivity and specificity.

Management
Therapy and prognosis depend on the patient’s clin­
ical stage and antibody titers. Antimicrobial options
include meglumine antimoniate (75–100 mg/kg SC q24h)
for 4–8 weeks, allopurinol (10 mg/kg PO q12h) for at
least 6–12 months, or miltefosine (2 mg/kg PO q24h) for
4 weeks. Meglumine antimoniate and allopurinol may
also be given in combination. Complete staging, ther­
apy, and prognostic guidelines have been described (see
Recommended further reading). The disease in zoonotic
and infected dogs can serve as a reservoir in the pres­
ence of the appropriate sandfly vectors. In endemic areas,
euthanasia of infected dogs is part of the eradication pro­
gram, although this is controversial.

histoplasmosis
Definition/overview
Histoplasmosis is the second most commonly reported
systemic fungal infection in cats. In dogs, the disease is
common in geographic areas of high prevalence such as
the mid-­Atlantic, south central, and Mississippi regions of
the USA.

Etiology
The causative fungal agent, Histoplasma capsulatum, is commonly found as a mycelial form in soil rich
with bird or bat manure. It occurs predominantly
within the Mississippi region of the USA. Cats housed
16.59

Diagnosis
The most consistent laboratory findings are mild to mod­
erate nonregenerative anemia, hyperglobulinemia due to
polyclonal gammopathy, hypoalbuminemia, decreased
albumin:globulin ratio, and proteinuria. Rarely, mono­
clonal gammopathy is reported. Half or fewer cases will
present with thrombocytopenia, azotemia, and increased
serum ALP and ALT activities; leukocytosis or leukope­
nia may occur. High serum antibodies with appropriate
clinicopathologic signs are confirmatory, but low or neg­
ative serum antibodies warrant further testing, namely
cytology or histopathology. Characteristic organisms
are present in macrophages of the bone marrow, lymph

K22463_C016.indd 731

Figure 16.59 Leishmania amastigotes within a bone marrow
macrophage from a dog.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

732

Diseases of specific organ systems

16.60

exclusively indoors are thought to acquire infection
through ­household dust or potting soil.

Pathophysiology
Infection is by inhalation or ingestion of infective conidia.
After transmission, infective conidia transform to the
yeast phase and are engulfed by mononuclear phago­
cytes and disseminated throughout the body in lymph
and blood. Multisystemic disease is common in infected
cats. In persistently infected organs there is granuloma­
tous inflammation.

Clinical presentation
The mean age of feline patients is 3.9 years, and most
dogs are under 5 years of age. Clinical findings in cats fre­
quently include depression, weight loss, emaciation, fever,
pale mucous membranes, organomegaly, respiratory
signs (dyspnea, tachypnea, abnormal lung sounds, chronic
cough), and ocular signs. Less frequent signs are soft tis­
sue swelling, joint effusion, lameness, vomiting, diarrhea,
or CNS involvement. Canine patients show ­similar signs
to cats, but GI involvement is more frequent.

Differential diagnosis
Mycobacterial infection, protozoal infection, other sys­
temic fungal agents, neoplasia.

Diagnosis
Routine laboratory tests are not specific for histoplasmo­
sis but may reflect the extent of systemic involvement.
Some cats may develop pancytopenia due to marrow
infection. Hypercalcemia associated with granuloma­
tous disease is infrequent. Yeast forms are found within
monocytes/macrophages of the blood, bone marrow, lung,
lymph node, liver, rectal scrapings, spleen, effusions, tra­
cheal or bronchoalveolar washes, and, rarely, within cere­
brospinal fluid (Figure 16.60). The organism may also be
found within neutrophils and, rarely, in eosinophils. They
are oval structures measuring 2–4 microns and having
a thin clear space or halo around them. Granulomatous
inflammation and organisms are found on histopathol­
ogy. A Histoplasma urine antigen test is currently being
validated for use in cats; preliminary studies show high
diagnostic sensitivity (17/18). A Blastomyces urine anti­
gen test cross-reacts with Histoplasma antigens and may
be used to diagnose systemic fungal disease. Fungal cul­
ture is not recommended because it is hazardous for lab­
oratory personnel.

Management
Treatment should be continued for 4–6 months to be
most effective. The current drug of choice is itraconazole

K22463_C016.indd 732

Figure 16.60 Bone marrow smear from a cat with systemic
histoplasmosis. There are numerous small, round to ovoid
yeasts within two macrophages.

(10 mg/kg PO q24h) in dogs or cats with disseminated his­
toplasmosis. In cats, the oral solution is more consistently
absorbed than the capsules, so administration of itracon­
azole capsules may require more frequent dosing (10 mg/
kg PO q12h).
A combination of itraconazole and amphotericin B
is used in severe disseminated forms. Amphotericin B
is given at 0.25–0.5 mg/kg IV three times weekly for
2–3 months. Ketoconazole (10 mg/kg PO q12h) has lower
potency against Histoplasma, but may be considered if
there are financial constraints.

PLATELET DISORDERS (NON-NEOPLASTIC)
Platelets are anucleate cells produced in the bone mar­
row from the cytoplasmic shearing of megakaryocytes.
Platelets are a critical component of hemostasis, and
will therefore primarily be presented in the next chap­
ter (Chapter 17: Disorders of hemostasis). However, causes
of ­
non-neoplastic thrombocytosis and dysplasia are
offered here.

REACTIVE THROMBOCYTOSIS
Definition/overview
A non-neoplastic thrombocytosis is termed reactive
thrombocytosis.

Etiology
Etiologies include exercise and epinephrine, inflamma­
tion, iron deficiency, recovery from thrombocytopenia,
blood loss, nonhemic neoplasia, vincristine and vinblas­
tine, and splenectomy.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

733

Pathophysiology

Clinical presentation

Exercise and epinephrine cause splenic contraction and
increased blood flow, which leads to redistribution of
platelets from the spleen and lungs into circulating blood.
Other etiologies cause enhanced platelet production.
For example, inflammatory cytokines, especially IL-6,
­stimulate thrombopoietin production and, subsequently,
thrombopoiesis.

Macrothrombocytopenia is typically an incidental find­
ing when the patient presents for routine evaluation or
for other disease.

Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, DIC, megakaryo­
cytic leukemia.

Clinical presentation

Diagnosis

Signs are dependent on the underlying disorder.

Diagnosis is based on the presence of thrombocytopenia
and giant platelets in affected dogs (Figure 16.61). Median
measurements in one study of platelets in Cavalier King
Charles Spaniels compared with other breeds were
2.5–3.75 µm and 1.25–2.5 µm, respectively. The reduced
platelet count is partially related to giant platelets being
missed by automated hematology analyzers with small
thresholds. Platelet counts measured by platelet mass (e.g.
QBC hematology analyzer) better reflect the true platelet
concentration. Studies indicate that male dogs have sig­
nificantly lower platelet counts than females of the breed.

Differential diagnosis
Essential thrombocythemia, primary myelofibrosis, PV.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on an increased platelet concentra­
tion in the presence of an underlying cause for reactive
thrombocytosis. Epinephrine release also causes eryth­
rocytosis, neutrophilia, lymphocytosis, and hyperglyce­
mia. Moderate to marked neutrophilia, a left shift, or the
observation of toxic neutrophils supports inflammation.
Blood loss is identified by anemia and decreases in albu­
min and globulin concentrations. Microcytic hypochromic
nonregenerative or poorly regenerative anemia suggests
iron deficiency. History and physical examination find­
ings are also helpful. Persistent, marked thrombocytosis
without an underlying etiology should raise concern for
leukemia.

Management
Treatment is directed at the underlying cause.

MACROTHROMBOCYTOPENIA
Definition/overview

Differential diagnosis

Management
Treatment is not warranted for affected dogs.

Prognosis
The disorder is not known to affect hemostasis.

DYSPLASTIC DISORDERS
Dysplastic disorders are characterized by developmen­
tal changes within the erythrocytes, granulocytes, and
platelets. The etiology may be related to inheritable,
16.61

Macrothrombocytopenia (thrombocytopenia with giant
platelets) is an inherited disorder of Cavalier King Charles
Spaniels, as well as Norfolk and Cairn Terriers, without
hemorrhage or clinical signs. The giant platelets have
diameters greater than those of RBCs.

Etiology
The disorder is caused by a mutant beta1-tubulin gene.

Pathophysiology
The mutant beta1-tubulin forms unstable dimers, which
results in altered platelet formation and the release of
large platelets. Small numbers of giant platelets result in
a normal or near normal total platelet mass in the blood.

K22463_C016.indd 733

Figure 16.61 The platelets of Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
dogs with macrothrombocytopenia range from normal
(arrowhead) to giant (arrow) in size.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

734

Diseases of specific organ systems

infectious, drug-induced, and nutritional conditions.
While ­dysplastic disorders often affect multiple hema­
topoietic lineages, abnormal growth of one cell line typ­
ically results in the patient’s clinical manifestations. For
this reason, select dysplastic disorders are included with
the cell lineage that is chiefly deregulated. Disorders
that primarily present as erythroid dysplasia include
iron deficiency anemia, FeLV infection, Poodle marrow
dyscrasia, folate or cobalamin (vitamin B12) deficiency,
and lead poisoning. Manifestations of leukocyte dyspla­
sias are Pelger–Huët anomaly, cyclic hematopoiesis of
gray Collies, and leukocyte granule abnormalities. The
most common platelet dysplastic disorders are macro­
thrombocytopenia of Cavalier King Charles Spaniels and
vincristine-associated macrothrombocytes. Previously
considered a preleukemic dysplasia, myelodysplastic
syndrome is now considered a form of myeloid neoplasia,
and will be addressed in the corresponding section.

DRUG-INDUCED DYSPLASIA
Definition/overview
Antibiotics and antineoplastic agents can produce revers­
ible morphologic changes in blood cells.

Etiology
Drugs implicated are azathioprine, cyclophosphamide,
cytosine arabinoside, vincristine, and chloramphenicol.

Pathophysiology
The drugs disrupt the normal production of erythroid
cells within hours to days following administration. The
mechanism is not related to folate deficiency.

HEMATOPOIETIC MALIGNANCIES
Hematopoietic malignancies include neoplasms of lym­
phoid cells (lymphocytes and plasma cells), myeloid cells
(erythrocytes, nonlymphoid leukocytes, and megakary­
ocytes), and uncommitted stem cells (acute undifferenti­
ated leukemia). Lymphoid neoplasms are more common
than those of myeloid origin.

LYMPHOID NEOPLASIA
Malignant lymphoid conditions may originate from tis­
sues such as lymph nodes, alimentary tract, thymus,
spleen, liver, skin, and eye, or from the bone marrow. The
term leukemia is used when neoplastic cells appear in
blood or bone marrow, while lymphoma designates lym­
phoid neoplasia arising from the other sites. Primary leu­
kemia originates from the bone marrow progenitor cells,
while secondary or metastatic lymphoid leukemia occurs
as a late and advanced stage of the disease. Lymphoid leu­
kemia is further classified based on the maturity of the
neoplastic cells. Acute lymphoid leukemia denotes a pre­
dominance of immature cells, namely blast cells, whereas
small mature lymphocytes present in chronic lympho­
cytic leukemia. A neoplasm of plasma cells arising from
the bone marrow is called myeloma, whereas nonmarrow
sites are referred to as plasmacytomas. Lymphoid neo­
plasms, arranged in descending frequency of occurrence,
are lymphoma, plasmacytoma, plasma cell myeloma,
chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and acute lymphoblastic
leukemia.

lymphoma

Clinical presentation

Definition/overview

Signs will reflect the underlying conditions.

Lymphoma (the preferred term over lymphosarcoma) is
the most common hematopoietic tumor of dogs and cats.
Multicentric disease is more common in dogs and usually
involves the peripheral lymph nodes, spleen, and liver.
Other sites of canine lymphoma include alimentary, thy­
mic, cutaneous disease, and miscellaneous extranodal
locations in decreasing frequency. Thymic lymphoma
is most common in young, FeLV-positive cats, while ali­
mentary lymphoma is more common in older cats. Cats
may also develop multicentric, renal, and cutaneous
lymphoma.

Differential diagnosis
Myelodysplastic syndrome, acute myeloid leukemia,
nutrition-related dysplasia.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on blood and bone marrow samples
taken during routine post-treatment hematologic eval­
uations. Morphologic changes involve dyserythropoiesis
characterized by macrocytosis, megaloblastoid changes,
nuclear fragmentation, sideroblastosis, and siderocyto­
sis. Folate concentrations are within normal limits.

Management
Normal morphology of hematopoietic cells occurs several
days after cessation of drug therapy.

K22463_C016.indd 734

Etiology
Prior to widespread FeLV testing and vaccination pro­
grams, about 60–80% of feline cases were associated with
FeLV infection. However, positive FeLV antigenemia is
only identified in 10–20% of contemporary cases. Strong

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

evidence for a retroviral etiology in dogs does not exist.
Environmental exposure is also considered a possible eti­
ology. The Boxer, Bulldog, Bull Mastiff, Golden Retriever,
and Labrador Retriever dog breeds are overrepresented.

735

16.62

Pathophysiology
Lymphoma originates in peripheral lymphoid tissues,
which causes local tissue injury and dysfunction. Over
time, neoplastic cells will infiltrate widely into a vari­
ety of sites, which often include multiple lymph nodes,
spleen, liver, and bone marrow.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs often involve nonpainful swellings of
superficial lymph nodes. Splenomegaly or hepatomegaly
may be present, along with internal lymphadenomegaly.
Mediastinal or thymic masses can produce dyspnea, pleu­
ral effusion, or effects associated with hypercalcemia such
as polydipsia and polyuria. Cutaneous lesions can arise as
a mild eczematous pruritic plaque and progress to a nod­
ular lesion. Weight loss, vomiting, and inappetence often
suggest an advanced stage with worse prognosis.

Figure 16.62 A lymphoblast in a dog with stage V lymphoma.
Note the cell’s large size, immature chromatin, and nucleoli.
16.63

Differential diagnosis
For generalized lymphadenopathy: disseminated
infections, immune-mediated disorders, and other
hematopoietic tumors. For alimentary disease: lympho­
cytic–plasmacytic enteritis, other neoplasms, granulo­
matous bowel disease, and hypereosinophilic syndrome
should be considered. For cutaneous disease: pyoderma,
other infectious or immune-mediated disease, parasitic
infestation, and other neoplasms should be considered.

Figure 16.63 Cytologic preparation of large cell lymphoma
in a dog. The neoplastic lymphocytes are large with open
chromatin and prominent nucleoli. Mitotic figures (arrow) and
macrophages (arrowhead) are frequent.

Diagnosis
Hematology often reveals anemia of chronic disease,
but a full CBC with blood smear evaluation is recom­
mended to assess for concurrent blood loss or hemolysis,
FeLV-associated macrocytosis, myelophthisis-associated
­
cytopenias, and circulating atypical lymphocytes sug­
gestive of stage V disease (Figure 16.62). Bone marrow
aspiration is performed for staging, prognosis, and cases
in which lymphoma is suspected, but otherwise not
proven.
Serum biochemical abnormalities include hypercalce­
mia in 15% of dogs with lymphoma due to parathyroid
hormone-related peptide production by neoplastic cells,
azotemia with renal infiltration, elevated liver enzyme
activity due to hepatic involvement, or hyperglobulin­
emia and monoclonal gammopathy with some B cell lym­
phomas. Cats should be screened for retrovirus (FeLV and
FIV) infection for diagnostic, prognostic, and husbandry
purposes.

K22463_C016.indd 735

Imaging, including radiographs, ultrasound, and CT,
may be important for diagnosis, clinical staging, and
monitoring response to treatment. In particular, cranial
mediastinal lymphadenopathy in dogs negatively cor­
relates with remission and survival duration.
Lymphoma is frequently diagnosed from fine ­needle
aspirates of lymph nodes or other affected tissues or
fluids; these usually disclose a homogeneous popula­
tion of lymphoblasts (Figure 16.63). Lymphoma of large
granular lymphocytes has characteristic pink granules
(Figure 16.64) and is most associated with splenic ori­
gin. If cytology is equivocal in distinguishing extreme
lymphoid hyperplasia from early lymphoma, a surgi­
cal biopsy may provide a definitive diagnosis based on
changes in normal follicular architecture.
Advanced diagnostic techniques may be pursued in
cases where a diagnosis cannot be obtained by cytology or
histopathology, and for determining immunophenotype

25/04/16 11:16 pm

736

Diseases of specific organ systems

16.64

After remission is achieved, relapse with a more
drug-resistant form eventually occurs. At this time, res­
cue therapy may be pursued. While the response rate is
high, the length of response is generally half that of the
induction therapy. Many protocols have been reported,
and the complexity and toxicity of the chemotherapies
often requires consultation with a veterinary oncologist.

Prognosis

Figure 16.64 Cells from a cat with large granular lymphoma
containing abundant magenta coarse cytoplasmic granules.
Methanolic Romanowsky stain.

(B, T, or null cell). In these cases, immunocytochemistry,
immunohistochemistry, flow cytometry, or PCR for anti­
gen receptor rearrangement may be rewarding.

Management
In general, lymphoma requires systemic therapy. ‘CHOP’based protocols involve combination chemotherapies of
cyclophosphamide (C), doxorubicin (hydroxydaunorubi­
cin [H]), vincristine (Oncovin [O]), and prednisone (P). The
University of Wisconsin-Madison CHOP protocols are com­
monly recommended (see Recommended further read­
ing). Prior to administering any potentially myelotoxic
drug, a CBC should be performed to assess neutrophil and
platelet concentrations. Rare cases of solitary lymphoma
may be treated with surgery or radiation therapy.
In dogs, doxorubicin (30 mg/m2 IV q3weeks for 5 treat­
ments) is the most effective single agent chemothera­
peutic drug for lymphoma. For owners that opt for oral
medication, lomustine (CCNU; 70 mg/m2 PO q3weeks)
and prednisone (initially at 2.0 mg/kg PO q24h) can be
given. However, response rates and remission durations
are typically less than for CHOP-based protocols or doxo­
rubicin. Breeds at risk for P-glycoprotein drug transport
abnormalities, including Collies and Shetland Sheepdogs,
should undergo MDR1 gene mutation analysis prior to
chemotherapy.
Unlike dogs, single agent doxorubicin is not effective in
cats. Cats with small cell GI or hepatic lymphoma can be
administered oral chlorambucil (2 mg q48h or 20 mg/m2
q2weeks) and immunosuppressive and tapering doses of
oral prednisone. This protocol offers remission and median
survival times of approximately 2 years.

K22463_C016.indd 736

Untreated dogs and cats survive an average of 4–6 weeks
after lymphoma diagnosis, but individual survival is
dependent on tumor location and grade. Remission rates
for combination CHOP chemotherapy are 75–90% for
dogs and 60–70% for cats, with median survival times of
12 months in dogs and 7 months in cats. In 25% of patients,
this may extend to 2 years survival. Response rates and
lengths vary, and are dependent on prognostic factors. In
general, poor prognostic indicators for canine lymphoma
include T-cell phenotype, presenting with clinical signs of
disease (WHO substage b), heavy bone marrow infiltra­
tion (WHO stage V), and presence of cranial mediastinal
lymphadenopathy. A high histopathology grade tends to
give high initial response rates, but reduced overall sur­
vival. Prior steroid treatment is associated with short­
ened response durations. General positive prognostic
factors in cats include negative FeLV status, low histo­
pathology grade, lack of clinical disease at presentation,
addition of doxorubicin to treatment protocols, and com­
plete response to therapy.

chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Definition/overview
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) has a slow and pro­
tracted course of months to years. It occurs mostly in
middle aged to older dogs (mean 10 years), with a higher
frequency in females. This form of leukemia occurs infre­
quently in cats.

Etiology
An etiology has not been definitively proven.

Pathophysiology
Phenotypically mature lymphocytes proliferate, and
there is an increase in the stem cell compartment. In
dogs, about 70% are of T cell origin (CD8+, CD4+), with the
remainder B cells or null cells. CLL arises from mature
cells, but one form with granular morphology has been
shown to develop initially from the spleen. Generally,
the malignancy spreads into liver, spleen, and lymph
nodes late in the disease. Cases of B cell origin may

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

present with increased gamma globulins, with resulting
­hyperviscosity owing to paraprotein overproduction.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs include lethargy, inappetence, vomiting,
mild to absent lymphadenomegaly, organomegaly, and
fever. Polyuria, polydipsia, hemorrhage, lameness, and
collapse may also occur. Routine screening may detect
asymptomatic disease.

737

Management
Chemotherapy to reduce the neoplastic cell population is
warranted when clinical or hematologic signs are pres­
ent. Drugs include chlorambucil (dogs: 0.2 mg/kg PO q24h
for 10 days, then 0.1 mg/kg PO q24h; cats: 2 mg/cat PO
q48h) and prednisone (2 mg/kg PO q24h), with adjust­
ment of dosing based on response.

Prognosis

Prognosis is generally good with survival in the range of
2 or more years, but progression to acute lymphoblastic
Canine ehrlichiosis, other infectious diseases, post-­ leukemia is likely.
vaccinal responses in young dogs.

Differential diagnosis

acute lymphoblastic leukemia

Diagnosis
There is marked lymphocytosis of mature, small lym­
phocytes with condensed chromatin (Figure 16.65). Cell
counts range from 10,000 cells/µl to 300,000 cells/µl or
more. A subset of CLL has granular lymphocyte morphol­
ogy with an increased amount of pale blue cytoplasm and
fine to coarse cytoplasmic pink granules. In dogs, lym­
phocyte counts exceeding 25,000/µl in blood or greater
than 15% in bone marrow strongly suggest a malignant
process. Mild normocytic, normochromic nonregenera­
tive anemia is common. Neutropenia and thrombocyto­
sis occur late in disease with myelophthisis. Biopsy with
histopathology may better document the infiltration into
nodal tissues by neoplastic lymphocytes, with loss of tis­
sue architecture. Causes of chronic systemic disease (e.g.
ehrlichiosis, leishmaniasis) should be ruled out. Flow
cytometry or PCR for antigen receptor rearrangement
can demonstrate malignancy in equivocal cases.
16.65

Definition/overview
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia is a rapidly progressive
disorder that occurs mostly in middle aged dogs (mean
6 years) and in cats with FeLV infection.

Etiology
Viral agents (FeLV) or environmental exposure are possi­
ble causes.

Pathophysiology
The bone marrow or peripheral blood contains morpho­
logically immature precursor cells or lymphoblasts.
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia is thought to arise from
the bone marrow and later spreads to the liver, spleen,
and other tissues.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs include lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, and
diarrhea over several weeks. Neurologic signs may occur
with marked thrombocytopenia. Hepatosplenomegaly
occurs, but lymph node involvement is minimal to none.

Differential diagnosis
Stage V lymphoma, acute myeloid leukemia without mat­
uration, acute undifferentiated leukemia.

Diagnosis

Figure 16.65 Chronic lymphocytic leukemia in a dog with a
lymphocytosis of 183,000 cells/µl. The lymphocytes are small
(i.e. ≤1.5 times the diameter of a RBC) with mature, dense
chromatin. There are also two lysed cells (arrows) and one
metarubricyte (arrowhead).

K22463_C016.indd 737

Hematologic abnormalities include increased numbers
of immature lymphoid cells in the blood or bone marrow
(Figure 16.66), nonregenerative anemia, neutropenia,
thrombocytopenia, and an occasional monoclonal gam­
mopathy. Flow cytometry may be useful to confirm an
acute leukemia phenotype (CD34+), as well as lymphoid
origin, since acute myeloid leukemia appears morpholog­
ically similar. Approximately 10% of cases are confined to
the bone marrow without detectable blood involvement

25/04/16 11:16 pm

738

Diseases of specific organ systems

16.66

16.67

Figure 16.66 Acute lymphoblastic leukemia from a dog bone
marrow. Note the large (i.e. ≥2.5–3 times the diameter of a RBC)
immature cells with high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, finely
stippled chromatin, and round to ovoid nuclei that contain
multiple prominent nucleoli.

Figure 16.67 Aspirate preparation from a lytic bone lesion in
a dog with multiple myeloma showing many plasma cells with
abundant basophilic cytoplasm, prominent perinuclear pale
zones, and peripherally placed nuclei with clumped chromatin.

(aleukemic leukemia). Bone marrow evaluation is war­
ranted in these cases and in cases with low numbers of
circulating blasts (subleukemic leukemia). PCR tests for
B- or T-cell antigen receptor rearrangement are available
for difficult to diagnose cases.

can lead to immunodeficiency and increased susceptibil­
ity to infection.

Management
Treatment most often involves the same combination
chemotherapy used for lymphoma. The prognosis is poor,
with median survival (untreated or treated) being less
than 3 months.

multiple myeloma
Definition/overview
Multiple myeloma (MM, plasma cell myeloma) is a malig­
nant disease of bone marrow plasma cells.

Etiology
The etiology is unknown.

Pathophysiology
Malignant plasma cells produce a clonal or, rarely,
biclonal population of immunoglobulins (M proteins
or paraproteins), light chains (Bence-Jones proteins), or
heavy chains (heavy chain disease). These proteins may
inhibit platelet function, causing bleeding diathesis, or
result in hyperviscosity syndrome, renal failure, amy­
loidosis, or cryoglobulinemia. Infiltration into the bone
marrow by neoplastic plasma cells produces hemato­
logic cytopenias. The destruction of bone by osteoclast-­
activating factors released by tumor cells results in lytic
lesions and hypercalcemia. Bone pain and pathologic
fractures are common sequelae. Plasma cell dysfunction

K22463_C016.indd 738

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs may be vague and variable, with lethargy,
anorexia, and lameness. Paresis, bone pain, blindness,
bleeding from mucous membranes, or polydipsia and
polyuria can occur.

Differential diagnosis
Ehrlichiosis, lymphoma,
osteomyelitis.

primary

bone

tumors,

Diagnosis
The four diagnostic features of MM are (1) hyperpro­
teinemia (hyperglobulinemia) with a monoclonal gam­
mopathy, (2) osteolytic lesions, particularly in the spine,
(3) >20% plasma cells in aspirates (Figure 16.67) or his­
tology sections of lytic bone lesions or bone marrow, and
(4) Bence-Jones proteinuria. Bence-Jones ­proteinuria is
infrequent in dogs and cats, and these light chains of
antibodies are best identified by electrophoresis of con­
centrated urine. Urine protein reagent strips will not
detect light chain proteinuria. Confirmation of the diag­
nosis requires two to three of the four diagnostic fea­
tures, depending on the level of confidence from each
criterion.

Management
Combination therapy in dogs and cats with melphalan
(0.1 mg/kg PO q24h for 10 days, then 0.5 mg/kg q24h)
and prednisone (0.5 mg/kg PO q24h for 10 days, then
0.5 mg/kg q48h). Patients should be monitored for myelosuppression with biweekly CBCs for the first 2 months,

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

739

and then monthly thereafter. Depending on which
­complications of MM are present, additional therapy may
include plasmapheresis for hyperviscosity, fluid ther­
apy for renal failure, orthopedic stabilization of patho­
logic fractures, and antibiotics for immunodeficiency.
Hypercalcemia, if present, typically resolves within 2–3
days of initiating chemotherapy.

electrophoresis) are important to ensure the lesion is
solitary.

Prognosis

Canine cutaneous and oral plasmacytomas tend to be
benign. Other plasmacytomas are potentially malignant,
with metastases occurring months to years after initial
diagnosis.

While complete elimination of disease is rarely achieved,
chemotherapy is effective at reducing tumor burden,
improving clinical signs, and reducing serum globulin
concentrations. In dogs, there is 43% complete remission,
49% partial remission, and median survival of 540 days
with melphalan and prednisone therapy. Extensive bone
lesions, light chain proteinuria, hypercalcemia, and ane­
mia are considered poor prognostic indicators. Cats tran­
siently respond to chemotherapy, but relapse relatively
early (median survival of 83–183 days).

plasmacytoma
Definition/overview
Extramedullary plasmacytoma is a neoplastic prolifera­
tion of plasma cells that arises from tissues other than
the bone marrow. The cells may be benign or malignant.

Etiology
The etiology is unknown.

Pathophysiology
Neoplastic plasma cells proliferate in the tissues.
Malignant neoplasms may cause local and systemic tis­
sue injury. Monoclonal gammopathies are less common
than with MM.

Clinical presentation
Canine cutaneous plasmacytomas are frequently
­dome-shaped, erythremic, hairless masses of the digits,
lips, and ears. Oral plasmacytomas may cause difficulty
drinking, eating, or breathing. Dogs with GI plasma­
cytoma may present with vague signs of alimentary
involvement.

Management
Solitary plasma cell tumors are treated with surgical exci­
sion and/or external beam radiotherapy.

Prognosis

MYELOID (NONLYMPHOID) NEOPLASMS
Myeloid leukemias are clonal proliferations of erythroid,
granulocytic, monocytic, and megakaryocytic cells. The
2008 WHO Classification of Tumors of Hematopoietic and
Lymphoid Tissues divides myeloid neoplasms into three
broad categories: myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), myelop­
roliferative neoplasia (MPN), and acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). The main differences between the new and previous
classification schema are that MDS was previously consid­
ered a premalignancy, and that lower percentages of blasts
are currently required for an acute leukemia designation.
A consensus classification system for canine and feline
myeloid neoplasms has not been established. Erythremic
myelosis is a historical term that refers to erythroid leuke­
mia of cats. Under the conventional classification, it encom­
passes MDS and erythroid subcategories of AML.

myelodysplastic syndrome
Definition/overview
MDS is characterized by persistent peripheral cytope­
nia(s), normocellular to hypercellular marrow, dyspla­
sia in one or more cell lines, and <20% blast cells in the
marrow.

Etiology
Affected cats may be seropositive for FeLV. Other causes
are idiopathic and may involve environmental effects or
genetic predisposition.

Differential diagnosis

Pathophysiology

Other cutaneous neoplasms, lymphoplasmacytic hyper­
plasia or inflammation, abscesses.

MDS often precedes acute leukemia by several weeks to
months. Increased apoptosis is considered the mecha­
nism for cytopenias in the face of marrow proliferation.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis requires cytologic or histopathologic biopsy.
For noncutaneous plasmacytomas, additional diagnos­
tics (survey radiographs, bone marrow aspirate, serum

K22463_C016.indd 739

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs involve chronic infections, lethargy due to
anemia, and hemorrhage.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

740

Diseases of specific organ systems

Differential diagnosis

Management

Chronic myeloid leukemia, immune-mediated nonre­
generative anemia, drug-induced dysplasia, nutrition-­
related dysplasia.

As the condition may persist for long periods of time
without major clinical disease, treatment is usually sup­
portive and includes antibiotics and blood transfusions
as needed. Dyserythropoiesis in the dog may respond to
recombinant human EPO (100 U/kg SC q48h for 10 days).
Immune suppression may be attempted, but cancer che­
motherapy is typically unrewarding.

Diagnosis
Other causes of dysplasia (e.g. drugs, breed-associated)
should be excluded. Diagnosis requires one or more cyto­
penias, normocellular to hypercellular marrow, <20%
marrow myeloblasts, and myelodyplasia. Dysplastic
changes in the blood or bone marrow include macrocy­
tosis, megaloblastosis (Figure 16.68), nuclear fragmen­
tation, abnormal cytoplasmic granulation, neutrophil
hypersegmentation (Figure 16.69) or hyposegmentation,
micromegakaryocytes or macrothrombocyte formation,
and cell gigantism.

16.68

Prognosis
Progression to AML is expected.

myeloproliferative neoplasms
Definition/overview
MPNs (chronic myeloproliferative disease/disorders) con­
sist of persistent, unexplained increases in one or more
myeloid lineages with a predominance of morpholog­
ically mature neoplastic cells. MPNs in small animals
include primary myelofibrosis, chronic granulocytic leu­
kemia, essential thrombocythemia, PV, and chronic myelo­
monocytic leukemia, and all are uncommon conditions.

Etiology
Feline MPN may be associated with FeLV infection.

Pathophysiology

Figure 16.68 Inappropriate metarubricytosis and a dysplastic
erythroid cell (megaloblast) in blood from a dog with
myelodysplastic syndrome.

16.69

Figure 16.69 Dysplastic hypersegmented neutrophil from a
dog with myelodysplastic syndrome.

K22463_C016.indd 740

Genetic mutations lead to cell proliferation and pro­
longed cell survival. BCR–ABL translocations have been
documented in dogs with chronic monocytic leukemia
and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. The leukemia
slowly effaces the marrow, leading to a chronic disease
course, and cytopenias of other cell lines later in disease.
Hyperviscosity syndrome is a potential complication of PV.

Clinical presentation
Animals with leukocyte proliferations often have no clin­
ical signs until late-stage disease. Therefore, animals may
appear healthy and diagnosis may be made with routine
health screens. Late-stage disease consists of organ and
marrow effacement, resulting in organomegaly, pallor
if anemia is present, sepsis due to neutropenia or non­
functional neutrophils, and hemorrhage from throm­
bocytopenia. Clinical signs in patients with PV relate to
increased RBC mass and blood hyperviscosity. Mucous
membranes are dark red (Figure 16.70) because of PCVs
of 0.65–0.82 l/l (65–82%). Splenomegaly is usually not
present. Polyuria, polydipsia, hemorrhage, and neuro­
logic disorders occur in 50% of canine cases. Clinical signs
of essential thrombocythemia include splenomegaly

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

741

16.70

16.71

Figure 16.70 Brick red gums in a dog with polycythemia vera.
(Courtesy J. Harvey)

Figure 16.71 Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia in a dog with
116,491 neutrophils/μl and 26,277 monocytes/μl.

and platelet function abnormalities such as spontaneous
bleeding and thromboembolism.

16.72

Differential diagnosis
For PV: causes of relative, appropriate absolute, and
inappropriate absolute erythrocytosis. For prolifera­
tions of neutrophils and monocytes: causes of leukemoid
response. For proliferations of eosinophils and baso­
phils: hypersensitivity reactions, parasitic infections,
and hypereosinophilic syndrome. For essential thrombo­
cythemia and primary myelofibrosis: causes of reactive
thrombocytosis.

Diagnosis
Since routine genetic testing is not available in veterinary
medicine, these leukemias are diagnoses of ­exclusion.
General features for all MPNs are persistent (>3 months)
unexplained increases in one or more cell lines and rel­
atively few blast cells in the bone marrow (<20% of all
nucleated cells).
The subclassification is dependent on which cell lines
are increased. Proliferations of neutrophils and/or mono­
cytes include chronic myelogenous leukemia, chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia, and chronic monocytic leuke­
mia (Figure 16.71). Leukocyte counts are often markedly
elevated (40,000–200,000/µl), and monocyte counts often
exceed 4,000/μl (Figure 16.72). Neutrophilic leukemia
must be differentiated from causes of a leukemoid inflam­
mation, such as pyometra and pyelonephritis. Chronic
eosinophilic leukemia is characterized by a high eosino­
phil count (often >50,000/µl) with a shift towards imma­
turity. It may be difficult to differentiate this malignancy
from reactive hypereosinophilic conditions (e.g. allergies,
parasitism, eosinophilic inflammatory diseases, mast cell

K22463_C016.indd 741

Figure 16.72 Large buffy coat
present in a cat with acute
myeloblastic leukemia displaying
marked leukocytosis. (Courtesy
J. Harvey)

tumors, and certain lymphomas). Chronic basophilic leu­
kemia is mostly reported in the dog. It has been associated
with thrombocytosis and anemia. Cytochemical staining
with omega-exonuclease is helpful in identifying baso­
phil precursors when cytoplasmic granulation is not
apparent. Mature and immature basophils are increased
in the blood or bone marrow, and tissue infiltration may
occur. Basophilic leukemia must be differentiated from
mast cell leukemia.
PV, a proliferation of erythrocytes (primary erythro­
cytosis), occurs infrequently in dogs and cats. Diagnosis

25/04/16 11:16 pm

742

Diseases of specific organ systems

requires ruling out other causes of erythrocytosis. Arterial
blood gas evaluations are normal, with no evidence of
hypoxemia. Erythropoietin levels are absent or reduced
when measured at specialist laboratories. Leukocyte and
platelet counts are normal to mildly elevated, and in a
few cases basophilia has been noted (Figure 16.73). Bone
marrow examination indicates erythroid proliferation
with normal morphology and maturation.
Essential thrombocythemia (primary thrombocythe­
mia) is a rare neoplastic proliferation of megakaryo­
cytes with subsequent thrombocytosis. Platelet counts
are persistently above 600,000/µl (usually >1,000,000/µl)
and platelet morphologic abnormalities may be present
(Figure 16.74). Neutrophilia or basophilia may also be
observed.
Primary myelofibrosis (chronic idiopathic myelo­
fibrosis) causes persistent thrombocytosis due to a
16.73

proliferation of atypical megakaryocytes along with
enhanced granulopoiesis with variable amounts of mar­
row fibrosis (see Figure 16.34). The peripheral blood often
has concurrent immature granulocytes and nucleated
erythroid cells, termed a leukoerythroblastic reaction.
Erythrocytes may display poikilocytosis with tear-drop
formation or dacryocytosis (see Figure 16.33) resulting
from the marrow fibrosis. Bone marrow aspiration is
often difficult and is related to the presence of myelofi­
brosis, so core biopsy is required to confirm the diagnosis.

Management
Treatment is not required until clinical signs or cytope­
nias of non-neoplastic cells develop. Hydroxyurea is most
commonly used, and has produced successful reductions
in leukemic cell counts. In dogs, hydroxyurea is initially
given at a dosage of 20–25 mg/kg PO q12h until there is
a significant reduction in the neoplastic cell counts. For
white cell neoplasms, the dosage is dropped to 10–15 mg/
kg PO q24h or 50 mg/kg PO q2–3weeks when the ­leukocyte
concentration is <20,000 cells/µl. For PV, once the PCV is
below 0.6 l/l (60%), hydroxyurea can be tapered to the
lowest effective frequency based on monitoring of the
PCV. Lower initial doses of hydroxyurea (10–15 mg/kg PO
q12h) should be used in cats due to their greater risk for
myelotoxicity. Phlebotomy (15–20 ml/kg/day) provides
immediate relief for PV. Supportive care (e.g. antibiot­
ics, blood transfusions, and fluids) should be given when
indicated.

Prognosis
Figure 16.73 Feline blood with high hematocrit (0.64 l/l [64%])
and basophils (arrows) in a case of polycythemia vera.
16.74

Survival of months to years is expected, but eventual
drug refractoriness or blast transformation is possible.

acute myeloid leukemia
Definition/overview
AML is a proliferation of immature nonlymphoid hema­
topoietic cells that often results in myelophthisis and
poor prognosis.

Etiology
FeLV is associated with feline AML, especially the eryth­
roid subtypes.

Pathophysiology

Figure 16.74 Essential thrombocythemia in a dog having
numerous, occasionally atypical, platelets along with frequent
basophils (arrows).

K22463_C016.indd 742

Immature myeloid cells proliferate rapidly and efface
the bone marrow, resulting in life-threatening cytopenia.
Neoplastic cells often disseminate hematologically to the
tissues, causing widespread organ infiltration. BCR–ABL
translocation has been documented in one dog with acute
myeloblastic leukemia.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

Hematologic disorders

743

16.76

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs include organomegaly, pale mucous mem­
branes, sepsis, and hemorrhage from thrombocytopenia.

Differential diagnosis
Lymphoid leukemia, recovery following viral, toxin, or
drug-induced leukopenia.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is often made on a CBC and blood smear
review. Peripheral blood findings often include immature
myeloid cells and blast cells, as well as decreases in one or
more cell lines due to myelophthisis. Thrombocytopeniainduced hemorrhage may also contribute to the low red
cell mass. Bone marrow evaluation may be performed
in cases with low or no circulating blasts or when AML
subtype classification is desired. Flow cytometry or other
special diagnostic techniques (e.g. cytochemistry on
the blood or bone marrow) may be required to identify
the myeloid lineage of poorly differentiated leukemia.
Within the marrow, there is hypercellular marrow,
≥20% blast cells, and variable proportions of myeloid
cells. AML subtypes with a predominance of myelo­
blasts include acute myeloblastic leukemia minimally
differentiated (AML-M0), acute myeloblastic leukemia
without maturation (AML-M1), acute myeloblastic leu­
kemia with maturation (AML-M2), and acute promyelo­
cytic leukemia (AML-M3). Monocyte differentiation is
observed in acute myelomonocytic leukemia (AML-M4,
Figure 16.75), acute monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5a),
and acute monocytic leukemia (AML-M5b). Leukemias
with erythroid differentiation (Figure 16.76) are acute
erythroleukemia (AML-M6a) and acute erythroleukemia

16.75

Figure 16.76 Acute erythroleukemia in a FeLV-positive cat.
There are three segmented neutrophils and four nucleated
erythroid precursors, the largest of which is an erythroblast or
rubriblast (arrow).

with erythroid predominance (AML-M6b). Acute mega­
karyoblastic leukemia (AML-M7) has a prominent mega­
karyoblast component. Cytochemical staining of blast
cells is variably positive for peroxidase, Sudan black B,
chloroacetate esterase, leukocyte ALP, and acid phospha­
tase. When rebounding from neutropenia, such as that
following feline panleukopenia infection, the blood may
appear neoplastic owing to the presence of large num­
bers of myeloblasts in the bone marrow. Persistent hema­
tologic abnormalities must occur to confirm leukemia.
Regenerative attempts following leukopenia are gener­
ally evident after 7–10 days for nonleukemic conditions.

Management
In general, AML is poorly responsive to any chemother­
apy protocol. If therapy is pursued, lymphoma protocols
may be attempted, along with aggressive supportive care
for cytopenias.

Prognosis
The prognosis is poor, as AML therapeutic response rates
are low and overall survival times are short.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING

Figure 16.75 Blood from a dog with acute myelomonocytic
leukemia with arrows indicating immature myeloid cells
(myeloblasts) and an atypical segmented cell (arrowhead).

K22463_C016.indd 743

Harvey JW (2012) Atlas of Veterinary Hematology: A Diagnostic
Guide and Color Atlas. Elsevier, St. Louis.
Messick JB (2012) (ed.) Hematology. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 42:1–218.
Solano-Gallego L, Koutinas A, Miró G et al. (2009) Directions for
the diagnosis, clinical staging, treatment and prevention of
canine leishmaniosis. Vet Parasitol 165:1–18.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

744

Diseases of specific organ systems

Thrall MA, Weiser G, Allison R et al. (2012) (eds.) Veterinary
Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, 2nd edn. Wiley-Blackwell,
Ames
University of Wisconsin-Madison (2012) UW-Madison Lymphoma
Protocol for Dogs. https://uwveterinarycare.wisc.edu/­
wp-content/uploads/2012/10/k9_chop.pdf.

K22463_C016.indd 744

University of Wisconsin-Madison (2012) UW-Madison Lymphoma
Protocol for Cats. http://uwveterinarycare.wisc.edu/­
wp-content/uploads/2012/10/feline_chop.pdf.
Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ (2010) (eds.) Schalm’s Veterinary
Hematology, 6th edn. Wiley-Blackwell, Ames.

25/04/16 11:16 pm

745

Chapter 17
Disorders of hemostasis
Bobbi Conner

INTRODUCTION
Hemostasis refers to the process that minimizes blood
loss following injury. It encompasses aspects of primary
hemostasis, secondary hemostasis (usually thought of
as clotting or coagulation), as well as the induction of
local vasoconstriction that serves to limit loss of blood.
Although not technically part of the hemostatic process,
fibrinolysis is the important final step of the process
that functions to return blood flow to its pre-injury state
by removing the clot once it has served its purpose. All
phases of hemostasis and fibrinolysis commence as part
of a delicately balanced system that, when dysregulated
this can lead to excessive hemorrhage or inappropriate
thrombosis. An understanding of the normal physiology
is, therefore, crucial to an understanding of the pathology
when imbalances occur.

PRIMARY HEMOSTASIS
Primary hemostasis refers to the formation of the initial,
relatively unstable, platelet plug. Although platelets are
the major element of primary hemostasis, the vessel wall,
von Willebrand factor (vWF), and several other proteases

also play important roles in successful plug formation.
The process is commonly divided into three major phases:
platelet adhesion, activation, and aggregation.
In health, platelet adhesion occurs following compromise of the vascular endothelium, which exposes subendothelial collagen. Under high shear conditions, such as
the ones present in small and medium arteries, platelets
adhere to collagen via vWF, which binds to the platelet
membrane glycoprotein (GP) Ib-IX-V. In contrast, under
comparatively low shear stress conditions in large arteries and veins, platelets bind to collagen via fibronectin
and laminin. Once adhered, platelets become activated by
one of any number of pathways. Many platelet activators
have been identified and their relative importance varies between species (Table 17.1). The final step in platelet
activation involves release of granule contents, platelet shape change, and expression of GP IIb/IIIa, which
mediates binding of fibrinogen and platelet aggregation
(Figure 17.1).
The release of granule contents during activation is an
important step in the recruitment of additional platelets
to the developing plug, as well as factors important for
additional adhesion and aggregation. Some of the alpha
granule contents include fibronectin, clotting factors

Table 17.1 Relative activities of platelet activators in various species. NI, no information available.
Man

Dog

Rat

Calf

Horse

Pig

Sheep

Thrombin

++++

++++

+++

++

++++

NI

NI

ADP

+++

+++

++++

++

++++

+++

++

TXA2

+++

+++

NI

+

++++

++

++

PAF

NI

NI

NI

NI

++++

++

+++

Serotonin

++

++

+

NI

NI

NI

NI

Epinephrine

+

++

NI

+

NI

NI

NI

Ristocetin

+++

+++

NI

NI

+++

NI

++++

Collagen

+++

+++

NI

++

++++

NI

NI

ADP, adenosine diphosphate; TXA2, thromboxane A2; PAF, platelet activating factor.

K22463_C017.indd 745

23/04/16 1:17 pm

746

Diseases of specific organ systems

ADHESION
Platelet

ACTIVATION

Dense
granule

Alpha
granule
GP lb-IX-V

17.1

Fibrinogen

Granule
contents

Endothelial cell

vWF
Collagen
AGGREGATION

Activated
platelet

Fibrinogen

GP llb/llla

Figure 17.1 Platelet adhesion, activation, and aggregation. During adhesion, platelets bind to exposed subendothelial collagen.
Platelet activation leads to shape change and increased exposure of glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa as well as release of granule contents
to recruit additional platelets. Platelet aggregation is mediated by GP IIb/IIIa and fibrinogen under low-shear stress conditions.

(F) V and VIII, as well as vWF. Dense granules contain
­adenosine triphosphate (ADP), histamine, epinephrine,
serotonin, and calcium, among others. Most of the granule
contents play some role in hemostasis, although many are
also pro-inflammatory substances, such as i­nterleukin-1
and other cytokines.
Activated platelets begin to aggregate via GP IIb/IIIa
(also called integrin αIIb/β3) and fibrinogen (Figure 17.1)
under low-shear stress conditions; vWF and GP Ib-IX-V or
GP IIb/IIIa mediate aggregation under high-shear stress.
Inhibitors of platelet activation and aggregation,
such as prostacyclin, nitric oxide, and ecto-ADPase, are
released by or expressed on the surface of intact endothelial cells and are important for preventing platelet
plug formation in the absence of vascular damage as well
as limiting the spread of the platelet plug beyond the
damaged endothelium.

SECONDARY HEMOSTASIS (COAGULATION)
Traditionally, coagulation has been understood – and
taught – as a series of protease reactions, describing two
separate, redundant pathways leading to a final ­common
pathway with thrombin as the end-product. In the past
few decades, our knowledge about how coagulation happens in vivo has increased and vastly improved our understanding of the complex process of clot formation and
regulation. The previous ‘cascade’ model of coagulation

K22463_C017.indd 746

has largely been replaced by the cell-based model. This
has shed new light on both normal coagulation p
­ athways
as well as (and in particular) on why the process sometimes becomes deranged. Parallel to our growing understanding of coagulation there has been greater awareness
of imbalances that often lead to increased morbidity and
mortality. An understanding of the normal balance of clot
formation and breakdown is crucial to the identification
and safe treatment when these systems go awry.
The cascade model of coagulation (Figure 17.2) is not
an accurate reflection of the in-vivo process, yet it has
value in helping to interpret some of the diagnostic tests
commonly employed in veterinary medicine when trying to sort out a bleeding disorder. Separating some of the
serine proteases into the intrinsic, extrinsic, and common
pathways can be useful when evaluating the prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) tests
that are run as part of a standard coagulation profile. The
intrinsic factors – FXII, FXI, FIX, FVIII – are necessary for
a normal PTT test; the extrinsic factors – tissue factor (TF)
and FVII – are needed for a normal PT test; and the common pathway factors – FX, FV, FII, and FI – are required
for both tests to be normal.
The cell-based model of coagulation underscores the
important role that cells (platelets and endothelial cells
in particular) play in successful and balanced coagulation. It also illustrates that the cascade model is overly
simplistic and a poor reflection of the in-vivo process.

23/04/16 1:17 pm

Disorders of hemostasis

747

17.2
XII

XIIa
XI

Intrinsic pathway

XIa
IX

TF

IXa
VIII

Vlla

X

VIIIa

Xa

Extrinsic pathway
VII

Common pathway

Va

v

II
Ila

Fibrinogen (I)

Ia

Ia
Ia

Figure 17.2 Depiction of the traditional coagulation cascade. Activated clotting factors are denoted with an ‘a’. II, prothrombin; IIa,
thrombin; Ia, fibrin.

Based on our current understanding, rather than two
overlapping, redundant pathways to thrombin and fibrin
formation, coagulation is now described in terms of initiation, amplification, and propagation.
Initiation of coagulation occurs when TF becomes
exposed to circulating activated FVII (FVIIa) – this is
essentially the ‘extrinsic pathway’ from the cascade
model. TF and FVIIa combine to activate FX, which in
turn activates and binds FV to form the prothrombinase
enzyme. Prothrombinase will cleave prothrombin, yielding thrombin. Thrombin has a number of physiologic
functions, but its most important coagulation function
is the conversion of fibrinogen into fibrin. Fibrin monomers will spontaneously polymerize into a fibrin meshwork. With this process, it may seem that the ­intrinsic
pathway is not necessary for clot formation; however, we
know that patients with hemophilia A or B (FVIII or FIX
deficiency, respectively) have a bleeding tendency. This
is because the amount of thrombin and fibrin produced
at the end of this initiation process is relatively small;
the process must be amplified. Thrombin has a positive
feedback effect by activating FV, FVIII, and FXI, as well as
activating platelets, which will provide the scaffolding on
which the developing clot will form, and FXIII, which will
help to stabilize the final clot by cross-linking with fibrin.
The activation of FVIII and FXI will enhance the ‘intrinsic
pathway’ to yield more FX and therefore prothrombinase,

K22463_C017.indd 747

setting the stage for more thrombin formation during the
propagation phase (Figure 17.3).
Factor XII deficiency (also called Hageman factor deficiency) has been reported rarely in dogs, cats, and people.
It is associated with a prolonged PTT without a bleeding
disorder. Among other inconsistencies, this finding led
researchers to question the validity of the traditional
coagulation cascade and, ultimately, the development of
the cell-based model of coagulation.
A number of factors are in place to keep coagulation in
check. Circulating antithrombin (AT) will inactivate FVIIa,
FIXa, FXa, FXIa, FXIIa, and, to a greater extent, thrombin.
The activity of AT is enhanced >2,000-fold by the addition of unfractionated heparin (UH). Thrombomodulin
also participates in the prevention of excessive clot
formation. Thrombomodulin is expressed on endothelial cell surfaces and binds to thrombin. The thrombin–­
thrombomodulin complex will then activate protein C.
Once a
­ ctivated, ­protein C, along with one of its cofactors,
protein S, will inactivate FVa and FVIIIa.

FIBRINOLYSIS
Fibrinolysis, or the degradation of fibrin, is crucial for restoration of normal blood flow following vessel wall repair,
when the hemostatic clot is no longer needed. The fibrinolytic system relies on precise control, as imbalances can

23/04/16 1:17 pm

748

Diseases of specific organ systems

17.3

FXa
FX

TF + FVIIa

Fibrin
FXa
FV

TF-bearing cell

TF + FVIIa

FIX

Prothrombin

Fibrin
FXa prothrombinase
+
FXa

FVIII + vWF

Thrombin

FVIIa

FV
FXI

Fibrin
Fibrin

Prothrombin

Thrombin

Thrombin

FIXa

Fibrin
Fibrinogen

FIX
FVII

Fibrin

FVa
FXIa

FIXa

tenase

+
FXIa

FVIIIa

FVIIa

FX

FXa
+
FVa

Activated
platelet

Platelet

Figure 17.3 Depiction of the cell-based model of coagulation. F + Roman numeral denotes the corresponding clotting factor. F +
Roman numeral + a denotes the activated clotting factor. TF, tissue factor.

lead to hemorrhage (hyperfibrinolysis) or propagation
of thrombosis (hypofibrinolysis). Fibrinolysis is part of a
larger balancing act between pro- and anticoagulation,
but as a subsystem it is also regulated by activators and
inhibitors.
Cross-linked, polymerized fibrin is the primary and
most clinically relevant substrate when considering fibrinolysis; the protease of interest – plasmin – is the enzyme
responsible for thrombus degradation. Plasmin is generated by the activation of the zymogen plasminogen by a
plasminogen activator, either tissue-type plasminogen
activator (tPA) or urokinase/urine-type plasminogen activator (uPA). Plasminogen is inserted into the developing
clot and may be bound to fibrin for days before it becomes
activated by tPA and converted to plasmin.
When formed appropriately, clots serve the important function of preventing excessive blood loss following injury; therefore, early or excessive fibrinolysis must
be prevented. A number of inhibitors of the fibrinolytic
system act to either prevent activation of plasminogen,
or inhibit plasmin, once formed. The activity of tPA and
uPA will be blunted by plasminogen activator inhibitor
1 (PAI-1), preventing the activation of plasminogen into
plasmin. Alpha2-antiplasmin (α2AP) and thrombin activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) both interfere with
binding of plasminogen and plasmin to fibrin, thereby
preventing the breakdown of fibrin.
The breakdown of fibrinogen, fibrin monomers, and
cross-linked fibrin will all yield fibrin degradation products (FDPs) that are indistinguishable from one another.

K22463_C017.indd 748

D-dimers, on the other hand, only result from the
­breakdown of cross-linked fibrin. D-dimers are therefore
more specific for clot formation and breakdown.

DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH BLEEDING
(HYPOCOAGULATION)
PRIMARY HEMOSTATIC DISORDERS
thrombocytopenia
Thrombocytopenia is an abnormally reduced number
of circulating platelets, generally <100,000 platelets/µl
­(reference ranges may vary). Causes of thrombocytopenia
generally fall into one of five broad categories: (1) reduced
production; (2) consumption; (3) destruction; (4) sequestration; or (5) loss. Splenic sequestration or blood loss alone
rarely cause clinically significant thrombocytopenia.

reduced production
Definition/overview
Reduced platelet production by the bone marrow is a
common cause of thrombocytopenia in dogs and cats.

Etiology
Causes for reduced bone marrow thrombopoiesis may
include infectious agents (e.g. Ehrlichia canis, canine
distemper virus, feline leukemia virus), drugs or toxins
(e.g. chemotherapeutic drugs, linezolid, sulfonamides,

23/04/16 1:17 pm

Disorders of hemostasis

estrogen), and disorders that crowd the bone marrow
(myelophthisis).

749

17.4

Pathophysiology
Thrombopoietin (THO) is produced primarily in the liver
and stimulates megakaryocyte (platelet precursor) production and differentiation in the bone marrow. Once
released into the bloodstream, THO binds to a platelet
surface receptor, where it is subsequently degraded. This
results in blood THO concentrations that are inversely
related to platelet concentration. Fewer platelets in circulation lead to less THO breakdown and more is available to reach the bone marrow. When platelet numbers
are high in circulation, THO concentration (and therefore
platelet production) falls. If the bone marrow is unable to
respond to THO, platelets will not be replenished.

17.5

Clinical presentation
Patients may be presented with signs consistent with
a primary hemostatic disorder, including petechial or
ecchymotic hemorrhages (Figures 17.4–17.7). These occur
commonly on the gums, the pinnae, and the ventral
abdomen, but may occur anywhere on the skin or other
mucous membranes. Other mucosal hemorrhages may
be seen clinically as melena, hematemesis, epistaxis, or
hematuria (Figures 17.8–17.10), or other less common
locations (Figure 17.11). Clients and veterinary staff may
appreciate excessive bruising or prolonged bleeding from
venepuncture or catheter sites. Additionally, patients
may have clinical signs referable to the underlying disease process.

17.6

Diagnosis
A reduced number of circulating platelets will be diagnosed and confirmed with a complete blood count (CBC)
and blood smear (Figure 17.12). Identification of a primary disorder (e.g. E. canis) may lead to suspicion of a
cause for the reduced platelet production or consumption; however, bone marrow disorders are diagnosed on
a bone marrow aspirate or biopsy. (See Destruction for
more detail on platelet evaluation on a blood smear and
Chapter 16, Hematologic disorders, for bone marrow aspiration procedure.)

Management
Successful management of the underlying disease
often leads to a return of normal platelet production.
Withdrawal of the causative toxin or drug is also warranted in cases of exposure. If bleeding occurs secondary to severe thrombocytopenia, transfusion of platelet
products may be valuable. There is no evidence to support the transfusion of platelet products in the absence

K22463_C017.indd 749

Figures 17.4–17.6 A 4-year-old male castrated Shih Tzu with
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. Note the petechiae and
ecchymoses on the ventral abdomen, hindlimb, and gums.

of clinically significant bleeding or before emergency
­invasive procedures.
To date, neither commercially available fresh or stored
platelet products nor in-house prepared fresh platelet
products have proven efficacy for reducing or preventing
hemorrhage in thrombocytopenic veterinary patients.
The cost–benefit of these products must be carefully considered and prophylactic platelet transfusions should be
avoided except when invasive procedures must be performed (e.g. emergency surgery). Additional studies on

23/04/16 1:17 pm

750

Diseases of specific organ systems

17.9

17.7

Figure 17.9 Springer Spaniel with hematemesis. Note the
coffee ground appearance of the vomitus and the blood
staining on the forelimb.
17.10

Figure 17.7 Petechiae on the pinna of a dog with severe
thrombocytopenia.
17.8

Figure 17.10 Mastiff with epistaxis.
17.11

Figure 17.8 Melena. Note the very dark brown to black
color and tarry texture.

K22463_C017.indd 750

Figure 17.11 Hyphema in a dog with severe
thrombocytopenia. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

23/04/16 1:17 pm

Disorders of hemostasis

17.12

751

destruction
Definition/overview
Immune-mediated platelet destruction is a common
cause of thrombocytopenia in dogs, but is less common
in cats.

Etiology
Immune-mediated platelet destruction is often categorized as primary (autoimmune, mediated by direct
antiplatelet antibodies) or secondary (mediated by antibodies directed against cell-surface antigens from infectious agents, tumors, or some drugs).
Figure 17.12 Blood smear from a dog with severe
thrombocytopenia. Two platelets are seen in the center of the
field (arrow). The average number of platelets seen per 5–10
fields is then multiplied by 15 × 103/μl to yield a platelet estimate.

the effectiveness of these products in veterinary ­medicine
are needed.

Prognosis
Outcomes for dogs and cats with reduced platelet production will vary depending on the severity and response to
treatment of the underlying disease process.

consumption
Consumptive processes are typified by disseminated
intravascular coagulation (DIC), a complex syndrome of
coagulation activation triggered by a number of inflammatory conditions. This will be discussed in detail later
in the chapter. Endothelial damage or dysfunction can
also lead to consumption of platelets in the absence of DIC.

loss
Hemorrhage may also lead to loss of platelets, although
this is generally seen as only a relatively mild reduction in platelet count, and the platelet count typically
rebounds when the hemorrhage is controlled.
Massive hemorrhage requires massive transfusion
(generally defined as either replacement of the patient’s
total blood volume in less than 24 hours or 50% of the total
blood volume within 3 hours). Most protocols for massive
transfusion in people recommend blood is replaced with
various ratios of component therapy; for example, 3 units
of packed red blood cells: 2 units of fresh frozen plasma: 1
unit of fresh platelet concentrate. Similar protocols have
not been evaluated in veterinary patients.

K22463_C017.indd 751

Pathophysiology
Both humoral and cell-mediated immunologic mechanisms are described in immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. It may be associated with a variety of inflammatory
diseases that may serve as a ‘trigger’ for the immunologic
response, including various infectious and neoplastic
diseases.
Platelets are necessary for maintenance of endothelial intercellular junctions. When platelet numbers are
extremely low, these junctions are compromised, leading
to petechiae and ecchymoses. When platelets are normal
in number, but function is impaired – as with antiplatelet drugs and thrombocytopathias – petechiae are rarely
seen, but excessive bruising and mucosal bleeding may
occur.

Clinical presentation
All causes of thrombocytopenia may present with clinical signs referable to a disorder of primary hemostasis, including petechiae, ecchymoses, or mucosal
bleeding. Clinical signs of the associated or causative disease process may also be present. Primary or secondary
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia may be associated
with fever.

Differential diagnosis
Thrombocytopathy, endothelial dysfunction.

Diagnosis
Thrombocytopenia is identified with a CBC and confirmed
via evaluation of a direct blood smear (see Figure 17.12).
At 100× magnification, platelets should be counted;
the average number of platelets seen per 5–10 fields
is then multiplied by 15 × 103/μl to yield a platelet estimate. Review of the feathered edge for platelet clumps
is important; if significant clumping is seen, the platelet estimate should be considered the minimum platelet

23/04/16 1:17 pm

752

Diseases of specific organ systems

count. Screening for infectious and neoplastic diseases is
recommended in most cases. Antiplatelet antibody testing is neither sensitive nor specific and is not necessary.
Bone marrow aspiration is not routinely recommended,
unless a hematologic malignancy is suspected.

Management
The mainstay of treatment for immune-mediated platelet
destruction remains immunosuppressive corticosteroids.
Prednisone should be initiated at 2 mg/kg/day, although
dosages up to 4 mg/kg/day may be needed in small dogs
that do not initially respond to treatment. Dexamethasone
(or dexamethasone sodium phosphate) may be used initially in patients that cannot tolerate oral medications. It
should be dosed at 0.2–0.3 mg/kg/day of dexamethasone
IV. Adjunctive therapy with human immunoglobulin is
commonly employed in people and may reduce platelet
recovery time in dogs. Vincristine has also been recommended to shorten platelet recovery time in dogs. Other
adjunctive immunosuppressive drugs may be initiated at
the clinician’s discretion; however, investigations in veterinary medicine are lacking.

Prognosis
Survival rates of dogs with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia are around 80–85%, with similar rates reported
in cats (far fewer reports overall). A relapse rate of ~10%
in dogs can also be expected. Response times in dogs
range from 1 to 15 days after initiation of immunosuppressive therapy. Relapse is not uncommon, therefore
close monitoring of these patients’ platelet counts should
be done whenever there is a reduction in the prednisone
treatment dose and every 2–3 months while on maintenance doses.

­clopidogrel). More than 10 inherited platelet disorders
have been described in veterinary medicine. The most
common of these is von Willebrand disease (vWD). Three
forms of vWD are described: type I is characterized by
an overall reduction in small and large vWF multimers
(of which the large multimers are of greater significance
in hemostasis); type II is characterized by an absence
of the large multimers; and type III is the absence of all
multimers.

Pathophysiology
The specific pathophysiology of many acquired thrombocytopathias is poorly understood. Uremia is associated
with disruptions of vWF processing. Liver disease is associated with reduced platelet aggregation, although the
precise mechanism is unclear. Reduced or absent vWF
leads to impaired adhesion and aggregation.

Clinical presentation
Patients with a thrombocytopathia may be clinically
indistinguishable from a thrombocytopenic patient; however, if the platelet count is normal, there is a tendency for
mucosal bleeding rather than petechiae or ecchymoses.

Differential diagnosis
Thrombocytopenia, endothelial dysfunction.

Diagnosis

Thrombocytopathia (also referred to as thrombopathia)
refers to an abnormality of platelet function. This
could be from altered platelet adhesion or activation
or, more commonly, from altered or reduced platelet
aggregation.

Clinical suspicion is raised when mucosal bleeding
or petechiae occur in the absence of severe thrombocytopenia. A buccal mucosal bleeding time will be
prolonged despite normal or near-normal platelet
numbers. Advanced platelet analysis is necessary to
­
further differentiate thrombocytopathy from endothelial disorders. Platelet function analysis and platelet
aggregometry are the most commonly used tests for identifying platelet function disorders, and are commercially
available at outside laboratories. Viscoelastic testing
(i.e. ­
sonoclot, t­hromboelastography, and thromboelastometry) may be available to some clinicians and can
provide some insight into platelet function. Suspicion of
vWD can be confirmed with direct measurement of vWF
using an ELISA.

Etiology

Management

Thrombocytopathias may be acquired or inherited.
Acquired disorders have been described with various
infectious diseases, metabolic disorders (liver disease and
uremia), various neoplasms, or they may be ­iatrogenic
secondary to platelet-inhibiting drugs (e.g. aspirin,

Acquired thrombocytopathias are generally reversed
when the underlying condition is effectively treated. If
life-threatening bleeding occurs, transfusion of blood
products may be of use. Choice of product may depend
on the known or suspected pathophysiology. For vWD,

thrombocytopathia
Definition/overview

K22463_C017.indd 752

23/04/16 1:17 pm

Disorders of hemostasis

fresh frozen plasma or cryoprecipitate will provide vWF
to treat bleeding or prevent hemorrhage when surgery is
needed. A single dose of desmopressin acetate at 1 μg/kg
IV will stimulate release of vWF from endothelial stores in
type I vWD, and it may have a role in other thrombocytopathias as well. Repeated doses are not effective as stores
become depleted. Transfusion of platelet-­containing blood
products may be needed in some cases of thrombocytopathia until the underlying disease can be identified and
treated.

Prognosis
Dogs and cats with type I vWD can have varying degrees
of bleeding, but with client education directed at minimizing the chance of injury and preoperative planning,
dogs can be well-managed for years, whereas the prognosis for dogs with type III disease is grave because of a
severe bleeding tendency. Type II disease has a guarded
prognosis because of its intermediate tendency for bleeding. Prognosis for animals with acquired thrombocytopathy will depend on the severity of the underlying disease
and response to therapy. In general, platelet dysfunction
returns to normal when the causative disease is controlled or reversed.

vascular/endothelial dysfunction
Definition/overview
In health, the endothelium participates in the homeostatic mechanisms maintaining vascular integrity,
including normal anticoagulation, as well as the regulation of vascular tone. In inflammatory conditions, particularly sepsis, dysfunction of the endothelium leads to
imbalances of coagulation and impaired maintenance of
vascular tone.
Vasculitis is commonly confused with endothelial dysfunction. Vasculitis refers to direct inflammation (infiltration by white blood cells) of the blood vessels. This is
not a feature of endothelial dysfunction. The term vasculopathy is sometimes used to describe the latter condition and is more appropriate that the commonly misused
term vasculitis.

Etiology
Endothelial dysfunction has been implicated in human
diseases as varied as Alzheimer’s disease and sleep apnea
to hypertension and diabetes mellitus. In veterinary
medicine, it is most commonly suspected in systemic
inflammatory diseases, such as sepsis, severe trauma,
and pancreatitis.

K22463_C017.indd 753

753

Pathophysiology
Probably in response to exposure to various inflammatory cytokines, nitric oxide and prostacyclin production
and release by the endothelium are impaired, leading
to vasodilation and reduced platelet inhibition. This
may contribute to the development of DIC. Reduced or
increased platelet adhesion and activation may occur.
Reduced platelet aggregation may also be seen.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs may vary to include dysfunction of platelet
function, causing petechiae or excessive bleeding; however, increased risk of thrombosis is generally more likely
with endothelial dysfunction. A coagulation disorder is
frequently accompanied by loss of regulation of vascular
tone leading to hypotension.

Differential diagnosis
Thrombocytopenia, thrombocytopathy, DIC.

Diagnosis
Reliable diagnostic tests for endothelial dysfunction are
lacking. Clinical suspicion and resolution of signs with
successful treatment of the underlying disease are suggestive of vascular endothelial dysfunction.

Management
Treatment of the causative disease is paramount.
Supportive treatment for bleeding or thrombosis may be
needed in some cases.

Prognosis
Diseases causing endothelial dysfunction are generally
severe systemic inflammatory conditions with variable
prognoses. If rapid identification and treatment of the
primary disease process does not occur, prognosis will be
guarded.

secondary hemostatic disorders
inherited secondary hemostatic disorders
(hemophilias)
Definition/overview
Hemophilia A is a deficiency of FVIII and is the most common inherited deficiency of coagulation in veterinary
medicine. Hemophilia B is a deficiency of FIX and occurs
much less frequently than hemophilia A. Hageman factor (FXII) deficiency has been described in both cats and

23/04/16 1:17 pm

754

Diseases of specific organ systems

dogs. Deficiencies in other clotting factors and fibrinogen
are rarely reported.

Etiology
Both hemophilia A and hemophilia B are X-linked recessive traits, making them a disease of males almost exclusively. Factor XII deficiency has an autosomal recessive
inheritance pattern.

Pathophysiology
Factors VIII and IX are crucial in the amplification of
thrombin formation, and their absence or severe reduction may lead to clinically significant bleeding. Mild
reductions in factor concentrations correspond to a
milder bleeding diathesis. Factor XII does not play a crucial role in coagulation in vivo, and its absence is not associated with clinical bleeding.

Clinical presentation
Depending on the severity of the factor deficiency,
patients with hemophilia A or B may present with spontaneous bleeding or bleeding of varying degrees following surgery or trauma. Patients with FXII deficiency do
not exhibit abnormal bleeding.

Differential diagnosis
Acquired coagulopathy, DIC, vWD.

Diagnosis
Prolongation of a PTT test with a normal PT test in the
presence of unexpected bleeding is suggestive of hemophilia A or B (Figure 17.13). Prolongation of PTT in the
absence of bleeding may be suggestive of FXII deficiency.
Confirmation and differentiation requires quantification
of individual factors and is available at selected veterinary reference laboratories.

Management
Hemophilia A or B may not require regular therapy other
than careful avoidance of trauma. Prior to surgery and
other invasive procedures, or after accidental trauma,
a transfusion of fresh frozen plasma (10–20 ml/kg) is
appropriate for hemophilia A or B. If available, cryoprecipitate (1 unit/10 kg) may be used for hemophilia
A, but not hemophilia B. Packed red blood cells (RBCs)
(in a
­ ddition to fresh frozen plasma) or fresh whole blood
may be needed if significant bleeding occurs. Therapy
is not needed for FXII deficiency.

17.13

Patient with abnormal
bleeding - PT test
results:

Normal? Evaluate PTT
results:

Normal? Clotting
disorder unlikely cause
of bleeding

Factor VIII deficiency –
Hemophilia A

Prolonged? Evaluate
PTT results:

Prolonged? Evaluate
factor concentrations:

Factor IX deficiency –
Hemophilia B

Normal? Consider early
vitamin K1 antagonist
intoxication or early
liver failure

Factor XII deficiency =
Hageman factor
deficiency – consider
other causes of bleeding

Prolonged? Consider
vitamin K1 antagonism,
DIC, end-stage liver
failure, factor V or X
deficiency (rare)

Consider von
Willebrand factor
testing

Figure 17.13 Differential diagnoses chart for results of prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) tests.

K22463_C017.indd 754

23/04/16 1:17 pm

Disorders of hemostasis

Prognosis
Prognosis is good for many patients with hemophilia A or
B once the diagnosis has been confirmed and appropriate
precautions are taken. If the factor deficiency is severe
and causes frequent spontaneous bleeding, long-term
management may be more difficult. Breeders should be
alerted to the diagnosis and education provided to discontinue further breeding with the carrier bitch. Prognosis
for FXII deficiency is excellent.

acquired secondary hemostatic disorders
Definition/overview
Acquired disorders of coagulation are caused by an insufficient quantity or impaired function of one or more
essential clotting factors, which can occur secondary to
disease, injury, or intoxication.

Etiology
The most common simple acquired coagulopathy in veterinary medicine is intoxication by one of the many types
of anticoagulant rodenticides, mostly coumarins. Other

755

diseases or syndromes associated with complex acquired
coagulopathies (DIC, liver disease, sepsis, trauma) will be
discussed later in this chapter. As the use of therapeutic anticoagulants becomes more common in veterinary
medicine, the risk of iatrogenic coagulopathy or accidental overdose may increase.

Pathophysiology
The toxic mechanism of anticoagulant rodenticides
involves disruption of the vitamin K cycle in mammals
(Figure 17.14). Reduced vitamin K is a cofactor for the
enzyme γ-glutamyl carboxylase, which is necessary to
convert FVII, FIX, FX, prothrombin, protein C, and protein S to their functional zymogen forms. During this
process, reduced vitamin K is converted to vitamin K
epoxide. Coumarins, including warfarin, and the noncoumarin anticoagulant rodenticides antagonize the
enzyme ­vitamin K epoxide reductase, which is necessary for ­vitamin K recycling. When reduced vitamin K
stores become depleted, nonfunctional zymogens are
released into the circulation, preventing normal clot
formation.

17.14

Vitamin K antagonist
rodenticides

Vitamin K

Vitamin K epoxide
reductase

Quinone
reductase

Vitamin K epoxide

Gamma-glutamyl
carboxylase

Carboxylated
(functional) zymogen

Reduced vitamin K
(hydroquinone)

Nonfunctional
zymogen

Figure 17.14 The vitamin K cycle. Arrow with two crossed lines indicates inhibition.

K22463_C017.indd 755

23/04/16 1:17 pm

756

Diseases of specific organ systems

Clinical presentation
In the case of witnessed or suspected ingestion of anticoagulant rodenticide, patients are presented without
clinical signs if evaluated within 2–3 days of ingestion.
If ingestion is not suspected or treatment is not sought,
patients are often presented with signs referable to the
location and severity of bleeding. General signs of anemia (pallor, weakness, collapse) may be accompanied by
signs such as respiratory distress, hemoptysis, abdominal
distension, hematuria, vaginal bleeding, and epistaxis.
Uncommon presentations such as lameness may mislead
clinicians, delaying a timely diagnosis.

Differential diagnosis
Severe liver disease, DIC, iatrogenic anticoagulant overdose, congenital coagulopathy.

Diagnosis
Clinical suspicion is confirmed with ­prolongation of PT and
PTT tests (see Figure 17.13). Occasionally, the clinician
may note a prolonged PT prior to prolongation of PTT,
reflecting the more rapid depletion of functional FVII prior
to the other factors, because it has the shortest half-life of
the procoagulant factors. Thrombocytopenia is commonly
recognized at the time of diagnosis, and may be severe in
some cases. A proteins induced by vitamin K antagonism
(PIVKA) test is commercially available and will identify
the nonfunctional zymogens in circulation, in many
cases confirming the suspicion of exposure. False-positive
results may occur with severe liver dysfunction. A positive response to therapy is also supportive of a diagnosis.
Not all rodenticides cause coagulopathy. Other rodenticides have a toxic mechanism of hypercalcemia (calciferols causing hypervitaminosis D), phosphine gas
production (metal phosphides), or disruption of oxidative
phosphorylation, causing irreversible neurologic damage
(bromethalin). Clinicians should not assume that ‘rat poison’ necessarily refers to the anticoagulants and, whenever possible, the package or other information on the
toxin ingested should be requested and investigated.

Management
Shortly after ingestion, gastrointestinal (GI) decontamination may be curative. Induction of emesis is recommended if ingestion is believed to have occurred within
1–2 hours of hospital presentation. Activated charcoal may be indicated to reduce absorption. Once signs
of bleeding occur, GI decontamination is of no value.
Actively bleeding patients should be treated with fresh
frozen plasma or cryo-poor plasma (the supernatant
remaining after separation of cryoprecipitate – it contains all of the factors impaired by coumarins). An initial

K22463_C017.indd 756

dose of plasma of 10–20 ml/kg will halt bleeding in many
patients and should be given if the patient’s status is
deemed critical, which is often the case if hemorrhage is
present. Additional doses may be considered on the basis
of persistent bleeding or persistently prolonged PT and
PTT times. Definitive therapy with vitamin K1 (phytonadione) supplementation should begin as soon as possible
in all cases of known or suspected exposure, but after
samples have been collected for coagulation testing. The
PIVKA test will not be affected by the administration of
vitamin K1. Because anaphylaxis due to the cremophor
excipient (polyethoxylated castor oil) found in some
preparations (especially in the USA) can accompany a
bolus IV injection of vitamin K1, the recommended dose
of 5 mg/kg of phytonadione (vitamin K1) given by this
route should not exceed a rate of 1 mg per minute. This is
not a concern in countries where cremophor is not used
for vitamin K injectable preparations. In less urgent situations, parenteral vitamin K1 can be given at 5 mg/kg
SC using a 25-gauge needle or an oral preparation formulation can be given by mouth. The IM route of administration is contraindicated because of the excessive bleeding
that can occur with this route of administration, causing
hematoma and pain. Once the patient is s­ tabilized, 3–5 mg/
kg/day (given once or divided into twice daily dosing) of
oral vitamin K1 supplementation should be administered,
usually with a fatty treat (e.g. peanut butter, cheese),
which increases vitamin K1 absorption. Normalization of
clotting time tests may take up to 12–24 hours with vitamin K1 supplementation alone, so close monitoring of the
bleeding patient should occur for the first day, and fresh
frozen plasma should be administered as needed to control clinical signs. If the IV form is used, clotting times are
normalized in 20–30 minutes. Duration of therapy needed
varies with the generation of rodenticide ingested. The
half-lives of coumarins range from hours to weeks. If the
specific product ingested is not known, treatment should
be provided for 2–4 weeks and the clotting times (PT alone
is sufficient) rechecked 48–72 hours following cessation
of vitamin K1 supplementation. Other specific therapies
may be needed on a case-by-case basis, depending on the
location of the bleeding (e.g. careful thoracocentesis in the
patient with hemothorax, although this procedure is only
necessary if severe dyspnea is present, since most patients
will tolerate hemothorax and eventually resorb all of the
blood into their circulation).
Vitamin K1 (phytonadione) is active in the production
of functional clotting factors, and is the form that must
be supplemented in anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication. Vitamin K2 (also sometimes called menaquinone)
is the most common form found in animal products
and some over-the-counter supplements. Vitamin K2

23/04/16 1:17 pm

Disorders of hemostasis

will not effectively treat anticoagulant rodenticide
intoxication.

Prognosis
Prognosis following anticoagulant rodenticide ingestion
is good to excellent. If the patient can be treated prior to
development of bleeding, vitamin K1 supplementation
is a successful antidote. Bleeding is generally controlled
with a combination of transfusion with fresh frozen
plasma and vitamin K1 supplementation. Bleeding into
some locations may lead to life-threatening complications (e.g. intracranial hemorrhage), but this is rare.

DISORDERS OF FIBRINOLYSIS
inherited disorders
Definition/overview
Very little has been published regarding fibrinolytic disorders in veterinary species.

Etiology
Disorders of increased fibrinolysis in people are gener­ AI-1,
ally caused by a deficiency or dysfunction of α2AP, P
or FXIII, or elevated production/release of tPA or uPA.
These disorders may lead to a delayed bleeding phenotype. Alternatively, a thrombotic tendency from impaired
fibrinolysis may be seen in people with a deficiency
or dysfunction of plasminogen, fibrinogen, or tPA, or
with elevated concentrations of PAI-1 or TAFI. Reduced
­circulating α2AP has been demonstrated in Greyhounds
with a propensity for delayed bleeding after trauma or
surgery. A heritable component is presumed, but has not
yet been elucidated.

Pathophysiology
α2AP is an important inhibitor of fibrinolysis. It interferes
with the binding of plasminogen and plasmin to fibrin,
preventing premature fibrin breakdown.

Clinical presentation
Patients with an inherited disorder causing hyperfibrinolysis develop a delayed bleeding phenotype. Primary
and secondary hemostatic mechanisms are intact. Lack
of α2AP is associated with normal initial clot formation,
with hemorrhage usually occurring 1–3 days following
injury or surgery.

Differential diagnosis
Acquired disorders of primary or secondary hemostasis,
DIC, liver disease, trauma, sepsis.

K22463_C017.indd 757

757

Diagnosis
Direct measurement of the enzymes and regulators can
confirm suspicion of an inherited disorder of fibrinolysis, although testing of all components of fibrinolysis is
not readily available or validated in veterinary species.
Commercial assays are available to measure α2AP, plasminogen, FXIII, and fibrinogen and these should be evaluated in a patient suspected of a disorder of fibrinolysis.
Additional testing may be available at select laboratories.

Management
Antifibrinolytics such as tranexamic acid (TXA) and epsilon aminocaproic acid (EACA) have been used successfully in people with hyperfibrinolysis as well as in limited
reports in animals. If a hyperfibrinolytic d
­ isorder is confirmed or strongly suspected, administration of EACA
or TXA may be considered. A starting dose of 15 mg/
kg IV or PO q8h of EACA for 5 days postoperatively has
been shown to be beneficial in Greyhounds with fibrinolytic disorders. Dosages up to 40 mg/kg PO q8h have
been reported without obvious complications. There is
evidence in people that TXA may be more effective than
EACA; however, in the USA, there are few FDA-approved
indications for it and it can be difficult and expensive to
procure for veterinarians. In people, a dose of approximately 25 mg/kg PO q6–8h is recommended during the
perioperative period. Dose reduction is recommended in
cases of renal insufficiency because of reduced clearance.
The primary adverse side-effect of either EACA or TXA is
thrombosis; therefore, these drugs should be used with
extreme caution in patients with increased thrombotic
risk. Antifibrinolytics are contraindicated in DIC. Fresh
frozen plasma (10–20 ml/kg) will also provide a source of
α2AP and other fibrinolysis inhibitors in patients with a
deficiency.

Prognosis
If identified, an inherited disorder of fibrinolysis can be
managed with careful planning of surgery. Early evidence in Greyhounds suggests EACA as a promising treatment for dogs with a disorder of fibrinolysis. Although
unproven, breeders should be educated on the likelihood
of a genetic cause for hyperfibrinolysis in Greyhounds
and appropriate preventive measures should be recommended whenever possible.

acquired fibrinolytic disorders
Disorders leading to altered fibrinolysis can and do occur
in veterinary species, generally as part of a complex coagulopathy seen with systemic injury and inflammation.

23/04/16 1:17 pm

758

Diseases of specific organ systems

These will be discussed in more detail in the complex
hemostatic disorders section later in the chapter.

obstructed by all or part of a thrombus that developed at
another site in the circulation and became dislodged.

DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH
THROMBOSIS (HYPERCOAGULATION)

Etiology

Overview
Arterial and venous thromboses are increasingly recognized as complications of various diseases in veterinary
medicine. Far more has been published on thromboembolic disease in people, but it is unclear how much of this
can be extrapolated to animals. The general principles
of risk factors leading to thrombosis likely hold true.
Virchow’s triad refers to the three primary risk factors for
the development of thrombosis: (1) abnormal blood flow;
(2) endothelial injury or dysfunction; and (3) hypercoagulability. It is generally believed that the presence of two
or three of these factors increases the risk of thrombosis.
However, there is no evidence that the presence of only
one risk factor is insufficient for inappropriate thrombus
formation. Further, diagnosis of altered blood flow and
endothelial injury is elusive at best, nearly impossible
at worst. Much attention has, therefore, been focused
on identification of hypercoagulability in an attempt
to provide insight into the development of thromboembolic complications. There is strong evidence in people
that the development of venous and arterial thrombi is
somewhat different and each is associated with different
diseases.

VENOUS THROMBOTIC DISORDERS
Definition/overview
The occurrence of a blood clot (thrombus) that develops
within a vein in the absence of injury is referred to as
venous thrombosis. Thromboembolism refers to a vessel

Pathologic processes can overwhelm the normal balance
of hemostasis and excessive thrombin formation may
occur.

Pathophysiology
Development in situ of a thrombus frequently occurs
at sites associated with vascular damage or increased
blood turbulence or stasis. Factors promoting hyper­
coagulability include circulating TF expressed on microparticles or monocytes associated with many neoplasms,
depletion of normal anticoagulant mechanisms (AT loss
in protein-losing nephropathy or enteropathy), and probably many pathways that have not yet been elucidated.
Inflammatory conditions are frequently associated with
hypercoagulability; the reciprocal activation of the hemostatic and inflammatory systems is now well recognized.
Many diseases have been associated with thrombosis in
veterinary species (Table 17.2). Insertion of IV catheters
can also increase the risk of thromboembolic disease;
careful consideration of catheter location and size should
include these risks. Removal of catheters that are no longer needed, dysfunctional, or associated with thrombophlebitis (Figure 17.15) should be prompt.
In people, pulmonary embolism has a clear association
with deep vein thrombosis (DVT), making it a primarily
venous disorder. Given the rarity of DVT in dogs and cats,
it is as yet unclear in veterinary species if the same is true
or if pulmonary thrombi develop in situ (Figures 17.16,
17.17). Many of the diseases associated with pulmonary
embolism in dogs are also associated with venous thrombosis in other sites, suggesting a similar pathogenesis to
that seen in people.

Table 17.2 Selected diseases associated with thrombosis in people and animals.
People

Dogs and/or Cats

Surgery
Trauma
Immobility
Cancer
Chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy
Venous compression
Increasing age
Inflammatory bowel disease
Nephrotic syndrome
Obesity
Central venous catheterization
Cardiac disease

Atrial fibrillation
(Hypertrophic) cardiomyopathy
Hypothyroidism
Protein-losing nephropathy
Trauma
Hyperadrenocorticism
Cancer
Diabetes mellitus
Infective endocarditis
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
Sepsis

K22463_C017.indd 758

23/04/16 1:17 pm

Disorders of hemostasis

17.15

759

Clinical presentation
Many thrombi are clinically silent and only recognized on
postmortem examination. If clinical signs develop, they
are generally referable to the location of the thrombus.
Severe signs may include respiratory distress, cardiovascular collapse, regional edema, abdominal pain, ascites,
and lameness (Figures 17.18–17.20).

Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses will be variable depending on the
location of the thrombus. When pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) is suspected, other pulmonary diseases must be
ruled out, including pneumonia, heartworm disease, pulmonary hypertension, and cardiogenic pulmonary edema.

Figure 17.15 Thrombosis associated with an intravenous
catheter. Note the swelling associated with the vein just
proximal to the catheter insertion site.

Diagnosis
17.16

Figure 17.16 Large pulmonary artery thrombus (arrow) in a
dog with glomerular nephropathy secondary to amyloidosis.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

17.17

Figure 17.17 Multiple pulmonary thromboses (arrows) in a dog
with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C017.indd 759

Antemortem diagnosis may be difficult in some cases, but
various imaging modalities are often needed to confirm
the presence of a thrombus. Abdominal ultrasound can be
helpful for detecting portal and splenic vein thrombosis
as well as caval thrombosis. Pulmonary thromboemboli
can be challenging to identify, but CT is often helpful.
Thoracic radiographs are frequently inconclusive for
confirming PTE, although a large thrombus can cause a
grossly enlarged pulmonary artery. Echocardiography
is often helpful for identifying evidence of pulmonary
hypertension or primary cardiac disease. Coagulation
testing may add supportive evidence for the presence of
thromboembolic disease, but is not definitive. Elevated
D-dimer concentration or hypercoagulability seen on viscoelastic coagulation tests can increase suspicion.

Management
Control of the underlying disease process is crucial for
managing thromboembolic complications. When a disease with known thromboembolic risk is identified,
thromboprophylaxis warrants consideration. Protocols
have not been established in veterinary medicine; however, when venous thrombosis predominates, therapies
directed at coagulation may be preferable. UH or low-­
molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) may be considered for
in-hospital or at-home use (Table 17.3). Ideally, therapy
should be adjusted based on the results of anti-FXa activity, which is a commercially available assay that measures the amount of inhibition caused by either UH or
LMWH. For treatment of thromboembolic disease, a more
aggressive strategy may be needed. A combination of
either UH or LMWH and antiplatelet therapy may be considered. Newer drugs are continuously being developed,
and several oral anticoagulants have recently become
available for use in people. Safety and efficacy are not

23/04/16 1:17 pm

760

Diseases of specific organ systems

17.18

17.19

17.20

Figures 17.18–17.20 Dog with anterior vena caval thrombosis
secondary to disseminated intravascular coagulation. (17.18)
Head and neck swelling. Note the concurrent ecchymotic
hemorrhages over the neck. (17.19) Area of ischemic bowel
found at postmortem examination. (17.20) Lateral abdominal
radiograph showing severe dilation of the jejunal segment in
the ventral abdomen (arrow), which was attributed to intestinal
infarction secondary to disseminated intravascular coagulation.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C017.indd 760

yet known in veterinary species, but these new drugs
may offer a promising alternative to frequent daily
injections. In some cases, surgical thrombectomy may
be an option, but requires specialized surgical training
and facilities. Additionally, depending on the location
(main pulmonary artery), surgery might be a severe
risk to the patient. Antifibrinolytics are occasionally
considered, but carry significant risk of bleeding when
used systemically and have not yielded positive results
in the few published reports in the veterinary literature.
Antifibrinolytics remain the standard of care in people
with acute thromboembolic disease. Lack of efficacy in
dogs and cats may be related to inappropriate dosing or
administration or significant delays between occurrence
and treatment.
Because blood coagulation represents only onethird of the components contributing to thrombosis,
other strategies can and should be employed to prevent
thrombosis beyond drug therapy. Whenever possible,
­
controlled exercise should be encouraged in hospitalized veterinary patients. Even several short walks a day
for patients that are able to could make a big difference
in preventing thrombosis. Additionally, passive range
of motion exercises and massage can stimulate blood
flow in patients that cannot walk frequently or at all.
In general, the importance of encouraging even small
amounts of ­activity in patients that can tolerate it should
not be underestimated. This may be used alone or as an
adjunct to the pharmacologic interventions discussed
above.

Prognosis
Outcome following development of thromboembolic
complications can vary widely, but may be devastating
in some cases, making thromboprophylaxis an attractive strategy to employ while the predisposing disease
is being treated or managed. Studies in people suggest a significant benefit when thromboprophylaxis is
employed in patients with known risk factors. It is not yet
clear if this is also true in veterinary patients. Early evidence evaluating clot prevention strategies in dogs with
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia shows potential,
but further studies are needed to determine true efficacy
and the best treatment practices.

ARTERIAL THROMBOTIC DISORDERS
Definition/overview
Most arterial thromboses of dogs and cats occur in the distal aorta (Figures 17.21, 17.22), although there have been
a few reports of thrombi identified at other locations.

23/04/16 1:18 pm

Disorders of hemostasis

17.22

17.21

Figure 17.21 Distal aortic (‘saddle’) thrombus in a cat with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

761

Figure 17.22 Distal aortic (‘saddle’) thrombus in a dog. The
underlying cause was not identified. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Etiology
In cats, there is a clear association with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM), but arterial thrombosis has also
been associated with other forms of cardiomyopathy,
hyperthyroidism, and cancer. In dogs, the comorbidities
identified with aortic thromboembolism are more varied,
and include hypothyroidism, protein-losing nephropathy, hyperadrenocorticism, neoplasia, and diabetes mellitus. Hypothyroidism and protein-losing nephropathy are
the most frequently reported comorbidities.

17.23

Pathophysiology
It is generally accepted in cats that HCM predisposes to
development of thrombus formation in the left atrium,
which then embolizes to the distal aorta or, less frequently, a brachial artery, causing hindlimb or forelimb
dysfunction, respectively. In dogs, the development is less
clear, and it is unknown whether in-situ thrombus formation versus embolus from a distant site occurs.

Clinical presentation
In cats, once the embolus becomes occlusive, clinical
signs rapidly become evident and often include severe
paresis or paralysis of the affected limb(s), often with
accompanying pain. Hypothermia and tachycardia or
bradycardia are also frequently present. Around twothirds of cats have concurrent tachypnea or respiratory distress. As many as one-third of cats will have no
abnormalities detected on cardiac auscultation. Absent
femoral and pedal pulse with cool foot pads of the
affected limb(s) is commonly observed (Figure 17.23).
Dogs ­frequently have a more insidious onset, sometimes
with a long history (months) of lameness in the affected
limb. Absent or weak pulses in the affected limb are common. The term ‘intermittent claudication’ is used if the

K22463_C017.indd 761

Figure 17.23 Paw pads from a cat with aortic
thromboembolism. Note the difference in color between the
pads, the pad on the right showing acrocyanosis compared with
the pad on the left. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

signs are associated with temporary vascular occlusion
or v
­ asospasm associated with a small thrombus that
causes partial obstruction.

Differential diagnosis
Spinal cord disease, neuromuscular disease, orthopedic
disease.

Diagnosis
In cats, a diagnosis of arterial thromboembolism is frequently made based on results of physical examination
and a few clinical tests confirming absence of blood flow
to the affected limb(s). Echocardiography frequently confirms the presence of cardiomyopathy. Results of blood
work may be variable, but aspartate aminotransferase

23/04/16 1:18 pm

762

Diseases of specific organ systems

and creatine kinase are typically ­elevated, although not
specific for thromboembolism. In dogs, presence of an
aortic thrombus is generally confirmed with ultrasound
or CT.

Management
Treatment of the underlying disease concurrent with
therapy directed at reducing embolus/thrombus size or
preventing further thrombus formation is recommended.
The available evidence suggests that systemic fibrinolytic
therapy in cats is generally unsuccessful, but study designs
have not been maximized for success. Surgical or transarterial thrombectomy methods may be more successful,
but further evaluation of these more invasive techniques
is needed. Most commonly, clinicians aim to prevent further clot development while the natural process of fibrinolysis dissolves the clot. A combination of anticoagulation
with heparin and antiplatelet therapy may be warranted
in these cats (Table 17.3). Bleeding is an uncommon complication of anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy. Some
evidence in cats suggests clopidogrel to be superior to
aspirin in cats with thromboembolic disease. Clopidogrel
and aspirin are synergistic in people, and combination
therapy may be beneficial in veterinary species as well.
Concurrent management of heart ­failure is frequently
needed. Pain relief is also important in cats with thromboembolism. Similar treatment protocols are appropriate
for dogs with arterial thromboembolism. A combination

of UH or LMWH with one or more a
­ ntiplatelet drugs is
­recommended for most cases.

Prognosis
Prognosis for cats with aortic thromboembolism is
guarded to poor. Around two-thirds of cats do not survive
the initial insult, and there is a high rate of re-­embolization.
Reperfusion tissue injury can be a potentially devastating complication. Long-term survival reportedly ranges
from a few weeks to a little over a year. For dogs, the
prognosis may depend on the underlying disease and
success of treatment. For diseases that can be reversed or
controlled, signs associated with thromboembolic disease
can be successfully reversed as well.

COMPLEX HEMOSTATIC DISORDERS
DISSEMINATED INTRAVASCULAR
COAGULATION
Definition/overview
DIC is a syndrome characterized by systemic intravascular activation of coagulation within the circulation.

Etiology
DIC is always secondary to an underlying disease process. It has been difficult to describe, but in recent years
its pathogenesis has become better understood. Virtually

Table 17.3 Commonly used antithrombotic drugs.
Drug

Mechanism of action

Dose recommendation

Comments

Unfractionated
heparin

Thrombin, FXa
inhibition

600–900 units/kg/day, starting dose

Can be given as a CRI or divided into daily subcutaneous doses q8h; dose should be adjusted as needed

Dalteparin

FXa inhibition

Dog: 150 units/kg SC q8h
Cat: 100 units/kg SC q4h
*For feline ATE: 100 units/kg
SC q12–24h

The half-life of dalteparin is much shorter in cats,
limiting its usefulness in this species; a reduced frequency may be of benefit in cats with ATE

Enoxaparin

FXa inhibition

Dog: 0.8 mg/kg SC q6h
Cat: 1.5 mg/kg SC q6h

Further studies are needed to ensure adequate dosing
in dogs and cats

Warfarin

Vitamin K1
antagonism

Dog: 0.22 mg/kg PO q12h
Cat: 0.1–0.2 mg/kg PO q24h

Starting dose recommendations for both dogs and
cats; treatment must be carefully monitored and dosing adjusted accordingly

Aspirin

Cyclo-oxygenase
inhibition

Dog: 1 mg/kg PO q24h
Cat: 1 mg/kg PO q72h

Studies in dogs have shown that very low-dose aspirin
may be safely combined with prednisone usage

Clopidogrel

ADP-receptor
antagonist

Dog: 2–4 mg/kg PO q24h
Cat: 18.75 mg per cat q24h

Dosage in dogs is extrapolated and efficacy studies
are still needed

FXa, activated factor X; CRI, constant rate infusion; ATE, arterial thromboembolism; ADP, adenosine diphosphate.

K22463_C017.indd 762

23/04/16 1:18 pm

Disorders of hemostasis

any systemic inflammatory disease could lead to the
development of DIC. Some examples include sepsis, severe
trauma, pancreatitis, neoplasia, hepatic failure, as well as
some toxins and envenomations.
Snake venom composition can vary significantly
between species (and even within species), but many
snake venoms do contain molecules that can alter
hemostasis, and they are referred to as hemostatins.
Whether a venom component inhibits or activates coagulation depends on the molecule in question. Because
of the v
­ ariety of hemostatins found in different snake
venoms, the coagulopathy that occurs from snakebites
can also vary widely. Veterinarians are encouraged to
become familiar with the species of venomous snakes
in their region and learn what, if any, hemostatic alterations should be expected and how they should be
managed.

Pathophysiology
DIC is characterized by simultaneous thrombin generation and depression of inhibitory mechanisms, such as
AT and the protein C system. This leads to widespread
fibrin deposition, potentially obstructing the microvasculature and causing ischemia and, ultimately, organ
failure. Later in the syndrome, the massive consumption
of platelets and clotting factors can lead to hemorrhage
(Figure 17.24). Impaired fibrinolysis also contributes
to an enhanced intravascular fibrin deposition in most
Underlying inflammatory disorder

17.24

763

cases. Some patients with DIC have simultaneous bleeding and thrombosis, making it a complex clinical challenge (see Figures 17.18–17.20, Figure 17.25).

Clinical presentation
Most patients with DIC will not have obvious signs of
bleeding until late in the syndrome. In the early prothrombotic phase, organ failure unrelated to the causative disease process may develop, such as acute kidney
injury, acute onset of respiratory distress, hepatic dysfunction, or neurologic deficits. Concomitant with organ
dysfunction is often evidence of consumption of platelets
and clotting factors that late in the syndrome may be
seen as petechiae, excessive bleeding from venepuncture
or catheter sites, or overt spontaneous hemorrhage, particularly from mucosal sites.

Differential diagnosis
Coagulopathy of liver disease, coagulopathy of trauma,
multiple organ dysfunction syndrome.

Diagnosis
A number of algorithms have been published for a diagnosis of DIC in people, but no universally accepted schema
yet exists for veterinary patients. The first criterion that
must be met for a diagnosis of DIC is the presence of a
disease capable of inducing the condition. This circular
definition is a large part of why DIC has been so confusing
and elusive. Broadly, any disease causing a widespread
inflammatory response might be capable of inducing DIC.
Several diagnostic tests are recommended to aid in the
identification of DIC, most commonly the presence of two
or more of thrombocytopenia, prolonged clotting times

Systemic activation of coagulation

17.25
Widespread fibrin deposition and
microvascular thrombosis

Consumption of platelets
and clotting factors

Microcirculatory obstruction

Thrombocytopenia and
clotting factor depletion

Organ failure

Hemorrhage

Figure 17.24 The pathways and clinical picture associated with
disseminated intravascular coagulation.

K22463_C017.indd 763

Figure 17.25 Postoperative bleeding and excessive bruising in
a dog with disseminated intravascular coagulation.

23/04/16 1:18 pm

764

Diseases of specific organ systems

(PT, PTT, activated clotting time), elevated D-dimer or FDP
concentration, or hypofibrinogenemia. Other markers
may include schistocytosis or a reduction of the natural
anticoagulants (AT or protein C). A significant decline in
platelet count and/or fibrinogen concentration, even in
the absence of overt thrombocytopenia or hypofibrinogenemia, may be an early marker of DIC in patients with
a predisposing condition.
Patients with complex hemostatic disorders should
generally not be treated on the basis of laboratory results
alone. Traditional tests of coagulation are poor predictors
for risk of bleeding and thrombosis.

Management
The only true successful strategy for treating DIC is control and reversal of the causative disease. Management
of the complications may be needed in some cases.
Once signs of active hemorrhage have occurred, transfusion of blood products is appropriate. Fresh frozen
plasma (10–20 ml/kg) should be given to correct bleeding caused by consumption of clotting factors. RBCs
should be ­
provided as needed in anemic patients to
support perfusion and oxygenation. Transfusion of
­platelet-containing products is rarely needed, but may
help reduce bleeding in patients with severe thrombocytopenia (<20,000 platelets/μl). In patients that are not
actively bleeding, but in which an invasive procedure
is unavoidable, correction of prolonged clotting times
is warranted. If surgery or other invasive procedure is
not necessary, ­however, transfusion of blood products to
correct ­laboratory coagulation abnormalities is neither
warranted nor recommended. Antifibrinolytic drugs are
typically contraindicated in patients with DIC, even those
with active bleeding, although this may be somewhat
controversial. In the early, nonhemorrhagic stage of DIC
when thrombosis predominates, antithrombotic therapy
may be considered. If thromboembolism is documented,
aggressive anticoagulation strategies are warranted
(Table 17.3).

Prognosis
Although DIC has traditionally been associated with
a hopeless prognosis, improved understanding of the
pathogenesis can allow early detection and aggressive
supportive care. The prognosis when overt DIC develops
should be considered guarded to poor, but when treatment for DIC is provided in parallel with definitive treatment of the underlying disease, favorable outcomes are
often achieved.

K22463_C017.indd 764

SEPSIS
Definition/overview
It is well established that sepsis in people is associated
with a prothrombotic state. Degree of coagulopathy is an
independent predictor of mortality in people with severe
sepsis and septic shock.

Etiology
Sepsis is defined as bacterial infection with systemic signs
of inflammation. Severe sepsis reflects septic patients
with evidence of organ dysfunction, and septic shock
refers to septic patients with refractory hypotension. All
septic patients have some degree of coagulation derangements, ranging from subclinical to overt DIC (see above).

Pathophysiology
Many mechanisms emerge in the inflammatory process to
lead to a prothrombotic state in sepsis. Cytokine-mediated
cross talk between the inflammatory and hemostatic systems is well documented. The most important of these
effects in sepsis include early and inappropriate activation
of the TF–FVIIa pathway leading to initiation of thrombin formation, as well as extensive platelet activation. At
the same time, endogenous anticoagulant pathways are
impaired, specifically AT and protein C activities. These
processes combine to generate an environment that fosters development of the micro- and macrothrombosis that
contributes to multiple organ dysfunction and failure.

Clinical presentation
Most of the signs of thrombosis in sepsis will be clinically
inapparent, especially to the clinician who is not looking
for them. All patients diagnosed with sepsis should be
presumed to have some degree of coagulation derangement. Patients that have progressed to a severe consumptive coagulopathy may present with signs of hemorrhage.

Differential diagnosis
DIC, coagulopathy of liver failure.

Diagnosis
Regular (every 1–2 days) evaluation of coagulation is
recommended for patients with severe sepsis or septic
shock to determine the degree of derangement present.
At a minimum, this should include a platelet count and
some evaluation of the coagulation system (PT, PTT, activated clotting time, thrombin time). Ideally, it would also
include evaluation of fibrinogen concentration, AT and/
or protein C concentration, D-dimer or FDP measurement, and viscoelastic testing (thromboelastography,

23/04/16 1:18 pm

Disorders of hemostasis

thromboelastometry, or sonoclot). Early recognition of
alterations may help guide supportive therapy or provide
an indication of disease progression.

Management
Approaches to avoid morbidity associated with coagulopathy in human septic patients have been disappointing. Provision of recombinant activated protein C was a
promising therapy that ultimately has been unsuccessful
in improving outcomes for people with severe sepsis or
septic shock. Some experimental data suggest a benefit
of heparin therapy; however, this has not yet been substantiated by clinical trials. Septic patients with overt
thrombosis should be treated as described for other
causes of thrombosis (Table 17.3); however, the risk of
bleeding complications may be higher in this population.
Nonpharmacologic measures to reduce the risk of thrombosis should be considered and employed whenever possible. Early ambulation in the postoperative period may
reduce the risk of venous stasis; when this is not possible, tissue massage and passive range of motion should
be contemplated. Patients with hemorrhagic tendencies
may need fresh frozen plasma or platelet transfusions,
especially if invasive procedures are necessary.

Prognosis
Severe sepsis and septic shock are associated with a
high mortality rate in people and companion animals.
Coagulopathies can significantly contribute to poor outcomes. Aggressive treatment of the source of the sepsis
combined with supportive care is still the best approach
to achieving satisfactory results.

LIVER DISEASE
Definition/overview
Coagulation abnormalities are common in dogs and cats
with acute and chronic liver disease and can lead to both
hemorrhagic and prothrombotic tendencies.

Etiology
Any disease that reduces the functional capacity of the
liver may have an effect on primary hemostasis, secondary hemostasis, and fibrinolysis. Toxic, infectious, congenital, and neoplastic diseases have all been associated
with hemostatic derangements in veterinary patients.

Pathophysiology
The liver is directly and indirectly involved in the regulation of all phases of hemostasis. Thrombocytopenia
and thrombocytopathia are both recognized in dogs and

K22463_C017.indd 765

765

cats with liver disease, although the exact mechanisms
are unknown. Reduced hepatic thrombopoietin production occurs in people, and may occur in animals with
liver disease as well. The liver produces all of the pro- and
anticoagulant proteins needed for secondary hemostasis,
and the diseased liver often has reduced capacity for this.
Similarly, most of the pro- and antifibrinolytic proteins
are produced in the liver. The final balance of hemostasis
in a patient with liver disease may rest anywhere on the
coagulation spectrum, resulting either in clinical bleeding, thrombosis, both, or neither. In addition, alterations
in portal blood flow may promote venous stasis and
thrombosis.

Clinical presentation
Despite frequent abnormalities in coagulation testing results for patients with liver disease, spontaneous
bleeding is rarely reported in dogs and cats (or people)
with even severe liver disease. Some exceptions include
severe, acute hepatotoxicity, as may be seen with aflatoxicosis or amanita toxicity. In people with advanced liver
failure (as with cirrhosis), prothrombotic tendencies predominate. An individual patient may develop a variety of
clinical signs ranging from petechiae and GI bleeding to
respiratory distress or abdominal pain and ascites from
PTE or portal vein thrombosis, respectively.

Differential diagnosis
DIC.

Diagnosis
Traditional tests of coagulation are inadequate for thoroughly evaluating hemostatic abnormalities in patients
with hepatic dysfunction. PT and PTT results do not
reliably predict bleeding episodes, probably because
they do not account for likely reductions in the natural anticoagulants AT and protein C, among others.
Thromboelastography (Figure 17.26) and other viscoelastic testing modalities have shown promise for providing
a more global assessment of coagulation and have been
used successfully for this purpose in people. In particular, thromboelastography may have a role in identifying
patients with hyperfibrinolysis, as sensitive and specific
tests for fibrinolysis are not readily available.

Management
It is important for clinicians to remember that correction
of laboratory abnormalities is not the goal of treatment
for patients with coagulopathy associated with liver disease. As with DIC, treatment should be aimed at correcting clinical abnormalities. Transfusion of blood products

23/04/16 1:18 pm

766

Diseases of specific organ systems

17.26

R
K Angle MA
G
LY30 LY60 A PMA CI
min min deg
mm
d/sc
%
% mm 0.0
4.2 2.4 59.0
49.6
4.9K
12.5 35.2 11.8
3–9 2–8 27–59 39–59 3.2K–7.2K 0–2 0–8

Figure 17.26 Thromboelastography tracing of a dog with
hyperfibrinolysis secondary to acute liver failure (solid line).
Note how the tracing regresses back to baseline after initial
divergence. Compare this with a normal tracing (dashed line) in
which the tracing does not return to baseline.

is warranted in patients that are actively bleeding, while
antithrombotics are appropriate for patients with evidence of thrombosis. Fresh frozen plasma (10–20 ml/kg)
may be used to halt significant bleeding. Component
therapy should be considered where available (e.g. cryoprecipitate rather than fresh whole blood or fresh frozen
plasma for patients with severe hypofibrinogenemia).
Heparin and/or antiplatelet drugs should be initiated in
patients with thrombosis (Table 17.3). The effect of UH
might be compromised in the absence of AT production
by the diseased liver, but this is not a concern when using
LMWH products. The value of antifibrinolytic drugs in
people with liver disease is still uncertain and has not
been evaluated in veterinary patients. It might be considered if a hyperfibrinolytic state was the suspected cause
of bleeding or invasive procedures are needed. EACA (15
mg/kg IV or PO q8h) may be given in the perioperative
period.

Prognosis
Patients with a reversible acute or chronic liver disease
often do very well, even if hemostatic derangements have
developed. Patients with irreversible liver disease that
progress to developing clinically significant hemostatic
abnormalities, including chronic DIC, carry a guarded to
poor prognosis.

TRAUMA
Definition/overview
Coagulopathy of trauma (CoT; also called acute coagulopathy of trauma, traumatic coagulopathy, and
­trauma-induced coagulopathy) is a recently recognized
phenomenon in which hemostatic derangements contribute to the secondary injury in patients with severe blunt
and penetrating trauma.

K22463_C017.indd 766

Etiology
Hypocoagulability and hyperfibrinolysis are the hallmark features of CoT; however, the exact mechanisms by
which these occur have not yet been clearly elucidated.
Several theories have been proposed, ranging from CoT
being a variation of DIC to a physiologic ‘overreaction’ to
endothelial damage promoting anticoagulant and profibrinolytic activity to counteract the prothrombotic state
induced by traumatic inflammation.

Pathophysiology
It is generally agreed that at least two key factors combine to initiate CoT. Tissue injury and tissue hypoperfusion lead to hypocoagulation and hyperfibrinolysis,
probably via endothelial damage and increased exposure
to thrombomodulin, which combines with thrombin to
activate protein C, a potent endogenous anticoagulant
and indirect promoter of fibrinolysis. Additional features
of CoT have been proposed and debated, and include systemic inflammation, hypothermia, and metabolic acidosis. After initiation of classic resuscitative strategies,
hemodilution and dilution of clotting factors may also
contribute to CoT, although some pretreatment hemodilution occurs from extracellular fluid shifting.

Clinical presentation
It can be difficult for the clinician to distinguish ongoing
hemorrhage from direct trauma/laceration of blood vessels and the possible development of CoT. Of course, persistent oozing or bleeding despite adequate mechanical
hemostasis (i.e. ligation) or bleeding at sites distant from
the trauma, including IV catheter sites, might increase
the suspicion of CoT and motivate clinicians to perform
diagnostic tests.

Differential diagnoses
DIC, pre-existing coagulopathies.

Diagnosis
Evidence of hypocoagulability and hyperfibrinolysis
is supportive of a diagnosis of CoT, although accepted
testing protocols are lacking in human and veterinary
medicine. Prolongations of PT and/or PTT >1.5 times
the mean of the reference interval are consistent with a
diagnosis of CoT. This does not account for the dynamic
nature of CoT, nor does it allow for assessment of fibrinolysis. Thromboelastography or other viscoelastic tests are
likely better suited for CoT evaluation. Hypocoagulable
thromboelastography tracings offer support of a diagnosis of CoT, and evidence of hyperfibrinolysis will add
valuable information to the overall picture.

23/04/16 1:18 pm

Disorders of hemostasis

Thromboelastography evaluates blood clot p
­ arameters
in whole blood. The classic tracing consists of an initial
divergence that reflects initiation of clot formation,
followed by the speed of clot development. The width
of the tracing reflects overall strength of the final clot.
During fibrinolysis, the tracing returns to baseline
(Figure 17.26).

Management
Treatment recommendations continue to change as new
studies emerge. Current therapy involves treating the
clinical signs of hemorrhage with blood products as dictated by results of coagulation testing (e.g. transfusion
of fresh frozen plasma for ongoing hemorrhage and
prolonged clotting times). Tranexamic acid therapy has
shown great promise for reducing mortality in human
patients suffering from severe trauma, but benefit is lost
if it is not given within 3 hours of the trauma. Whether
this can be extrapolated to veterinary patients is unclear,
and safety and efficacy studies are needed.

Prognosis
Overall survival rates for dogs and cats (~70–90% survival) that are presented to veterinary hospitals following trauma are quite good, although evidence suggests
the presence of CoT is associated with worse outcomes.

K22463_C017.indd 767

767

Aggressive treatment to stop ongoing hemorrhage and
vigilant monitoring of hemostasis may allow for better
provision of timely supportive care.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Brooks MB, Catalfamo JL (2013) Current diagnostic trends in
coagulation disorders among dogs and cats. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 43:1349–1372.
Glas-Greenwalt P (1996) Fibrinolysis in Disease: Molecular and
Hemovascular Aspects of Fibrinolysis. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
Kavanagh C, Shaw S, Webster C (2011) Coagulation in hepatobiliary disease. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 21:589–604.
Marder VJ, Aird WC, Bennett JS et al. (2013) (eds.) Hemostasis
and Thrombosis, 6th edn. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
Philadelphia.
McMichael M (2005) Primary hemostasis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
15:1–8.
Mousa SA (2010) Anticoagulants, Antiplatelets, and Thrombolytics,
2nd edn. Humana Press, New York.
Michelson AD (2013) Platelets, 3rd edn. Elsevier, London.
Palmer L, Martin L (2014) Traumatic coagulopathy. Part 1:
Pathophysiology and diagnosis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
24:63–74.
Palmer L, Martin L (2014) Traumatic coagulopathy. Part 2:
Resuscitative strategies. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 24:75–92.
Smith SA (2009) The cell-based model of coagulation. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care 19:3–10.

23/04/16 1:18 pm

This page intentionally left blank

769

Chapter 18
Dermatologic disorders
Diane T. Lewis

INTRODUCTION
History
A careful history and complete physical examination
of the patient are essential. It is important to establish
the age at onset, region of the body first affected, earliest symptoms, and progression of the disease, how
the disease has changed, initial seasonality, and how
pruritus correlates with the presence or resolution of
lesions. Flea bite hypersensitivity often begins in the
caudal trunk and hindlimb regions and may progress
to involve the entire body. Pruritus associated with
allergies may decrease when the patient is treated with
appropriate ­antibiotics for a staphylococcal folliculitis
or appropriate a
­ntifungals for Malassezia dermatitis.
Autoimmune diseases usually involve the face, with
variable i­nvolvement of the trunk or extremities, while
staphylococcal ­folliculitis may be limited to the trunk.
Miliary dermatitis in cats may begin as a localized or
generalized disease.
Because certain diseases have a heritable basis,
note should be made of the breed. Some diseases are
more common in young animals (e.g. food or flea
allergy, d
­emodicosis, dermatophytosis) while others are more common in middle aged to older animals
(e.g. ­endocrinopathies, neoplasia). The habitat of the animal should be noted. Is it likely that fleas or other ectoparasites will survive in the environment? What is the
status of coexistent pets in the household? Are people in
the household affected?
Response to previous treatment is useful in attempting
to define the list of differential diagnoses only when therapy has been used at appropriate dosages, for proper time
periods, and not used simultaneously with other drugs or
treatments.

secondary lesions that are diagnostically significant
(Figures 18.1–18.18) should be assessed.
All mucous membranes, oral cavity, eyelids, eyes,
mouth, lip margins, nasal planum, lymph nodes, the
inguinal and axillary areas, the interdigital spaces,
the claws and clawbeds, the footpads (Figure 18.19),
the perineum, and the ear canals should be inspected.

18.1

Figure 18.1 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Papule.
18.2

Examination
The skin should be examined in a systematic fashion. The degree and distribution of pruritus and the
nature and distribution of primary lesions and those

K22463_C018.indd 769

Figure 18.2 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Pustule
(arrow).

23/04/16 1:24 pm

770

Diseases of specific organ systems

18.6

18.3

Figure 18.3 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Macule.

Figure 18.6 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Tumor.

18.4

18.7

Figure 18.7 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Bulla
(arrow).
Figure 18.4 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Nodule.
18.8
18.5

Figure 18.5 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Plaque.

K22463_C018.indd 770

Figure 18.8 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Wheal
(arrows).

23/04/16 1:24 pm

Dermatologic disorders

771

18.9

18.12

Figure 18.9 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Vesicle
(arrow).

Figure 18.12 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Scar.

18.10

18.13

Figure 18.13 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Ulcer.
Figure 18.10 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Scale.
18.14
18.11

Figure 18.11 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Crust.

K22463_C018.indd 771

Figure 18.14 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Excoriation.

23/04/16 1:24 pm

772

Diseases of specific organ systems

18.18

18.15

Figure 18.15 Classification of dermatologic lesions.
Lichenification.

Figure 18.18 Classification of dermatologic lesions.
Hyperkeratosis.
18.16
18.19

Figure 18.16 Classification of dermatologic lesions. Epidermal
collarette.

18.17

Figure 18.17 Classification of dermatologic lesions.
Hyperpigmentation.

K22463_C018.indd 772

Figure 18.19 Examination of the feet. This must be included in
any dermatologic examination.

23/04/16 1:24 pm

Dermatologic disorders

Honey-colored crusts, epidermal collarettes, and ­circular
areas of alopecia are seen more commonly in dogs and
cats than is their predecessor, the pustule. When confined to the trunk, these secondary lesions more often
indicate a staphylococcal folliculitis rather than dermatophytosis. Should these lesions involve the face, ears,
or footpads, an autoimmune disease might be considered. A positive scratch reflex, elicited by rubbing the
pinna or ­
scratching the lateral thorax, may indicate
scabies (Figure 18.20). Pruritus of the dorsolumbar,
antebrachial, or umbilical areas would indicate flea bite
hypersensitivity.
After considering the patient’s history and physical and dermatologic examination findings, diagnostic
investigations may be ordered (Table 18.1).

773

18.20

Figure 18.20 Pinnal–pedal scratch reflex elicited in a puppy
with canine scabies. (Courtesy S.R. Merchant)

Table 18.1 Investigations used in dermatologic diseases of the dog and cat.
Test

Equipment

Method

Comments

Skin scraping
(Figures 18.21, 18.22)

Glass slide, #10 scalpel blade,
microscope, mineral oil,
­clippers, coverslips

Superficial: scrape broad area.
Deep: capillary oozing,
squeeze site, scrape and
pluck hairs

Adult parasites, eggs,
and feces may be noted

18.21

Figure 18.21 Glass slide with
material collected from a deep
skin scraping of a lesion from a
dog. Adequate deep skin scrapings
contain a large amount of blood.
Skin scrapings of a lesion should
be done on every dermatologic
patient.
18.22

Figure 18.22 Notoedres cati adult
mite in stratum corneum. (Case
material UFVMC)
(Continued)

K22463_C018.indd 773

23/04/16 1:24 pm

774

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 18.1 Investigations used in dermatologic diseases of the dog and cat. (Continued)
Test

Equipment

Method

Comments

Wood’s lamp (Figure 18.23)

Ultraviolet light with cobalt
or nickel filter may assist in
collecting hairs for culture

Apple-green fluorescence of
individual hairs

Negative examination
inconclusive; crust
and medications will
fluoresce

DTM, toothbrush, hemostats,
alcohol, glass slide, acetate
tape, lactophenol cotton blue

Plucked hairs; toothbrush
­collection of hairs; claw
shavings

Must identify any
­suspicious colonies

Acetate tape, glass slides,
Diff-Quik® stain, immersion
oil

Apply tape to lesion; stain
tape for yeast and bacteria;
apply to glass slide

Yeast and bacteria: use
×100; ectoparasites: do
not stain, use ×10

18.23

Figure 18.23 A positive Wood’s
lamp examination displays
fluorescence of individual
hairs. Scale, crust, and certain
medications will fluoresce in the
absence of true dermatophytosis.
A negative Wood’s lamp
examination is inconclusive for
dermatophytosis. (Courtesy A.
Mundell)
Fungal culture (Figure 18.24)
18.24

Figure 18.24 False-positive DTM
culture from a cat with a surface
yeast infection. Any suspicion
of dermatophyte growth on the
culture plate MUST be confirmed
by microscopic identification of
macroconidia. Nondermatophytic
fungi and yeast may turn the
culture media red, concomitant
with colony growth.
Acetate tape preparations
(Figures 18.25, 18.26)
18.25

Figure 18.25 Cytology of budding
yeast of Malassezia pachydermatis
from a dog with Malassezia
dermatitis.

K22463_C018.indd 774

23/04/16 1:24 pm

Dermatologic disorders

Test

775

Equipment

Method

Comments

Glass slides, Diff-Quik®
stain, 25-gauge needle,
immersion oil

Smear pustule contents onto
glass slide and stain

Look for intracellular
cocci and acantholytic
cells

10% formalin in containers,
suture, 6 mm biopsy punch,
needle drivers, scissors, #10
scalpel blade and handle,
forceps, pieces of tongue
depressor, local anesthetic

Punch biopsy for small
(4 mm) lesions; elliptical
biopsy for larger lesions or for
tissue culture

When the cutaneous
lesions are unusual
or do not respond to
routine therapy, use
nonulcerative lesions
or primary lesions;
supply extensive
history to veterinary
dermatopathologist

18.26

Figure 18.26 Cheyletiella spp.
adult mite. Note the diagnostic
hook-like mouth parts.
Pustule cytology (Figures 18.27,
18.28)
18.27

Figure 18.27 Cytology from a
pustule containing numerous
acantholytic cells without
polymorphonuclear intracellular
cocci is suspicious of, but not
diagnostic for, pemphigus
foliaceus. (Courtesy S.R. Merchant)
18.28

Figure 18.28 Cytology from a
pustule containing neutrophils
with intracellular cocci. (Courtesy
S.R. Merchant)
Skin biopsy

(Continued)

K22463_C018.indd 775

23/04/16 1:25 pm

776

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 18.1 Investigations used in dermatologic diseases of the dog and cat. (Continued)
Test

Equipment

Method

Comments

Intradermal allergy test

Allergens, syringes and
needles, diluent, histamine

Intradermal injections

For ASIT, not for food
allergy; withdraw
antihistamines and
cortisone

Serum allergy test

Syringe, needles, tubes

Venepuncture and serum
separation

For ASIT, not for food
allergy; may need to
withdraw ­antihistamines
and ­cortisone
­preparations; low
reliability

Hematologic, biochemical,
­serologic, fecal flotation, endocrine
therapy, ANA tests

Syringe, needles, tubes,
­special reagents

Venepuncture; serum; urine
via cystocentesis; plasma
required

Screens for systemic
disease; monitors
­immunosuppressive
drug therapy; detects
surface mite ingestion

Microbiologic bacterial culture

Culturettes

Material in pustule, bulla,
under crust or collarette

Prior antibiotic
­withdrawal unnecessary

Mycobacterial, anaerobic, subcutaneous culture

Sterile biopsy supplies

Aseptic dermal/subcutaneous
tissue acquisition

Culture not
­recommended for
­blastomycosis,
histoplasmosis,
coccidioidomycosis

DTM, dermatophyte test medium; ASIT, allergen-specific immunotherapy; ANA, antinuclear antibody.
Underlying medical or surgical problems should be investigated appropriately.

BACTERIAL INFECTIONS

(Figure 18.29). Lesions may be present at the lip, facial,
vulvar, hock, flank, or tail fold areas.

SKIN FOLD PYODERMA (INTERTRIGO)
Definition/overview

18.29

Intertrigo is an inflammatory condition that occurs at
sites of skin folds.

Etiology
Anatomic defects at certain body sites predispose to intertrigo. Areas prone to skin fold pyoderma include the face,
vulva, lip folds, body, flank, and tail fold.

Pathophysiology
Friction, abrasion, poor ventilation, and excess surface
secretions lead to maceration of the skin and secondary
inflammation, with colonization by bacterial and yeast
microorganisms.

Clinical presentation
Skin fold pyoderma is characterized by exudative,
odiferous, erythematous lesions within skin folds
­

K22463_C018.indd 776

Figure 18.29 Nasal fold pyoderma in an English Bulldog. (Case
material UFVMC)

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

Differential diagnosis
Atopic dermatitis (AD), food hypersensitivity, demodicosis, Malassezia pachydermatis infection, epitheliotropic
lymphoma.

Diagnosis
The presence of bacteria or yeast should be determined. Skin scrapings and tape strips or impression
smears of affected areas should rule out infection

777

with Demodex canis and M. pachydermatis, respectively
(Table 18.2).

Management
This will be a lifelong problem. Palliative therapy
includes clipping long hair, cleansing with antibacterial
and/or antifungal wipes, shampoos, appropriate antibiotic (Table 18.3) or antifungal creams. Phytosphingosine
solutions may be helpful. Surgical ablation of the

Table 18.2 Predisposing causes of pyoderma.

Pruritic

Nonpruritic

Cause

Investigation

Flea bite hypersensitivity

Flea eradication, IDAT flea antigen

Food hypersensitivity

Novel single protein prescription or
home-cooked diet for 12 weeks

Atopic dermatitis

History, rule out other causes of pruritus,
IDAT

Canine scabies

Response to therapy, SSS

Cheyletiellosis

SSS, tape preparations

Demodicosis

DSS, hair plucks

Hypothyroidism

FT4ed, TSH, TT4

Hyperadrenocorticism (endogenous,
atypical, or iatrogenic)

ACTH stimulation test, LDDST

Food hypersensitivity

Novel single protein prescription or
home-cooked diet for 12 weeks

Reproductive hormone imbalance

Rule out early Cushing’s and other
­endocrine causes, ACTH stimulation test
and hormone levels, neuter

Keratinization disorder (primary or
secondary)

Rule out allergic causes, response to
t­ opical/other therapy

Demodicosis

DSS, hair plucks

Occult neoplasia

Thorough search

Nutritional imbalance

Response to optimal diet

Severe metabolic disease

Thorough search

Immune system abnormality (deficiency
or immaturity)

Thorough search

Environmental factors

History, rule out other causes

Concurrent autoimmune disease

Skin biopsy, rule out infectious cause

Concurrent dermatophytosis

Dermatophyte culture

Idiopathic

Rule out all other causes

SSS, superficial skin scrape; DSS, deep skin scrape; IDAT, intradermal allergy test; LDDST, low-dose dexamethasone suppression
test; FT4ed, free T4 by equilibrium dialysis; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone; TT4, total T4; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone.

K22463_C018.indd 777

23/04/16 1:25 pm

778

Diseases of specific organ systems

Table 18.3 Antibiotic therapy for dermatologic disorders.
Generic

Species

Dose (mg/kg)

Route

Interval (hours)

Amoxicillin–clavulanate

C

10–20

PO

12

D

13.75–25

PO

12

Azithromycin

C

7–15

PO

12–24

D

5–10

PO

12–24

Cefadroxil

C

22–35

PO

24

D

22–35

PO

12

Cefovecin

B

8

SC

q14d

Cefpodoxime

C

5–10

PO

12–24

D

10

PO

24

Cephalexin

B

22–30

PO

12

Chloramphenicol

C

15–20

PO

12

D

40–60

PO

8

Ciprofloxacin

C

20

PO

24

D

10–30

PO

24

D

5–15

PO

12

Clarithromycin

C

7.5

PO

12

D

5–10

PO

12

Clindamycin

C

5–11

PO

12

C

11–33

PO

24

D

11–33

PO

24

D

11

PO

12

Doxycycline

B

5–10

PO

12–24

Enrofloxacin

C

5

PO

24

D

5–15

PO

24

Erythromycin

B

15–25

PO

12

Lincomycin

C

15–22

PO

12

D

15

PO

8

D

22

PO

12

Marbofloxacin

B

2.75–5.5

PO

24

Minocycline

B

5–25

PO

12–24

Moxifloxacin

B

10

PO

24

Ormetoprim/sulfadimethoxine

D

55 day 1
27.5 day 2

PO

24

Pradofloxacin

C

7.5

PO

24

D

3–5

PO

24

Rifampin

B

5–10

PO

12

Tetracycline

B

15–20

PO

8

Trimethoprim/sulfadiazine

B

10

PO

12

15–30

PO

12–24

D, dog; C, cat; B, dog and cat; PO, per os; SC, subcutaneous.

K22463_C018.indd 778

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

779

18.30

anatomic defect and weight reduction, if obese, offer a
­potential cure.

PYOTRAUMATIC DERMATITIS (ACUTE MOIST
DERMATITIS, HOT SPOT)
Definition/overview
Pyotraumatic dermatitis involves acute inflammation
and exudation of skin that has been damaged by chewing, scratching, or licking.

Etiology
Pyotraumatic dermatitis is very common in hot weather
and especially in dogs with thick, long hair coats.
Underlying diseases associated with pyotraumatic dermatitis include flea bite hypersensitivity, otitis externa,
ectoparasites, ocular disease, food hypersensitivity, contact dermatitis, AD, and anal sac disease.

Pathophysiology
Licking, chewing, or scratching in response to pruritus or
pain initiates erythematous, swollen, exudative lesions
that spread peripherally and are worsened by further
self-trauma (Figure 18.30).

Clinical presentation
Affected animals typically lick or scratch persistently at an
area of skin. The periaural and the dorsal and dorsolateral
lumbosacral regions are commonly affected. The skin is
erythematous and moist and may be exudative. Alopecia or
thinning of the hair may be evident later in the condition.

Differential diagnosis
Superficial burn, clipping or grooming, flea bite hypersensitivity, AD, calcinosis cutis, irritant contact dermatitis, folliculitis and furunculosis, food hypersensitivity,
demodicosis, dermatophytosis, anal sac disease.

Diagnosis
Clipping the hair coat allows visualization of the extent of
the lesion and identification of satellite lesions associated
with pyotraumatic folliculitis (Figure 18.31). Underlying
causes should be investigated and corrected.

Management
The goals of therapy of pyotraumatic dermatitis are to
clip the hair and clean the lesions, break the itch cycle,
and remove underlying causes. Papules or pustules surrounding the lesion indicate that folliculitis and furunculosis may be present and warrant appropriate systemic
antibiotic therapy (Table 18.3).

K22463_C018.indd 779

Figure 18.30 Acute moist dermatitis of the ventral neck in a
Pyrenean Mountain Dog. (Case material UFVMC)

IMPETIGO (PUPPY PYODERMA)
Definition/overview
Impetigo is a subcorneal pustular disease of prepubertal
dogs.

Etiology
Impetigo is often associated with poor husbandry conditions. Staphylococcus spp. are usually isolated from subcorneal pustules.

Pathophysiology
Impetigo is not contagious and may occur for no apparent reason. In some young dogs it may be associated with
parasitism, poor nutrition, or infectious diseases.

Clinical presentation
Nonfollicular pustules are localized to the sparsely haired
skin of the ventral abdomen and occasionally the axilla
in puppies aged 2–9 months (Figure 18.32). Ruptured
pustules appear as small yellowish crusts or epidermal
collarettes. Pruritus may be present.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

780

Diseases of specific organ systems

18.31

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the identification of cocci from
impression smears of the pustule contents.

Management
Impetigo is considered a self-limiting disease and
usually requires only topical antibacterial baths
­
combined with general health care. Severe or persistent cases may benefit from systemic antibiotics for
10–14 days. Cultures should be performed if antibacterial
treatment fails.

MUCOCUTANEOUS PYODERMA
Definition/overview
Mucocutaneous pyoderma (MCP) affects the lips, perioral skin, and occasionally other mucocutaneous areas
of dogs.

Etiology
The etiology of MCP is unknown, although bacterial infections play a role. Underlying diseases such as hypersensitivities and endocrinopathies may predispose dogs
to MCP.
Figure 18.31 Pyotraumatic folliculitis in a Golden Retriever.
Clipping of the hair coat allows identification of large, papular
satellite lesions at the periphery of the lesion.

Pathophysiology
The mechanisms that lead to MCP are not understood.
Antibiotics improve the condition, while relapse is
common.

Clinical presentation
18.32

Erythema, swelling, and crusting of the lips and perioral skin are evident and can lead to fissures, erosions,
ulceration, and depigmentation (Figure 18.33). Salivary
staining, exudate, and odor may occur. The planum
nasale, nares, prepuce, and perianal areas can be affected.
German Shepherd Dogs may be overrepresented.

Differential diagnosis

Figure 18.32 Large, nonfollicular pustules in a puppy with
impetigo. (Courtesy C.S. Foil)

Differential diagnosis
Contact irritant dermatitis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis, food hypersensitivity.

K22463_C018.indd 780

Lip fold intertrigo, cutaneous (discoid) lupus erythematosus (CLE), demodicosis, zinc-responsive dermatosis
or generic dog food dermatosis, pemphigus foliaceus or
pemphigus erythematosus, cutaneous T-cell (epitheliotropic) lymphoma.

Diagnosis
Location of lesions and response to appropriate,
extended antibiotic therapy (bacterial culture and sensitivity if indicated), followed by histopathology of a skin
biopsy confirm the diagnosis. Histopathologic changes

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

781

18.33

Figure 18.33 Depigmentation and erosion on the lips and
perioral area of a mixed-breed dog with mucocutaneous
pyoderma. (Case material UFVMC)

18.34

Figure 18.34 Patch of circular alopecia and erythema rimmed
by a subtle crust in a dog with staphylococcal folliculitis due to
food hypersensitivity.

can be confused with CLE, so antibiotic treatment is
­recommended prior to biopsy.

18.35

Management
Extended use of systemic antibiotics for Staphylococcus
species and topical mupirocin may temporarily clear the
disease, but relapses are common (Table 18.3). A search
for underlying causes (e.g. food hypersensitivity or hypothyroidism) is indicated. Maintenance therapy with
antibacterial wipes, topical mupirocin, and ophthalmic
antibacterial preparations for affected eyelids aid in
managing recurrences.

STAPHYLOCOCCAL FOLLICULITIS
Definition/overview
Staphylococcal folliculitis is a bacterial infection of the
hair follicles. Methicillin resistance is prevalent.

Etiology

Figure 18.35 Circular areas of alopecia in a Shar Pei with
staphylococcal folliculitis due to atopic dermatitis.

Changes to the cutaneous microenvironment lead to the
development of conditions favoring the growth of pathogenic staphylococci.

clinical signs are often similar to the circular lesions of
ringworm in people, dogs with staphylococcal f­ olliculitis
(Figure 18.34) are often mistakenly treated for ringworm (dermatophytosis). Lesions of circular alopecia,
a moth-eaten appearance to the hair coat, epidermal
­collarettes, honey-colored crusts, papules, pustules, macules, and crusted plaques are typical for staphylococcal
folliculitis in the dog (Figure 18.35). Superficial spreading pyoderma refers to the presence of large (1–3 cm)
erythematous macules with peripheral collarettes of
keratin.

Clinical presentation

Differential diagnosis

Staphylococcal folliculitis is extremely common in
canine patients presented for skin disease. Because the

Demodicosis, dermatophytosis, pemphigus foliaceus, dermatophilosis, Malassezia pachydermatis infection.

The most common causes of staphylococcal folliculitis are
endocrinopathies, hypersensitivities, and ectoparasites.
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius, S. schleiferi schleiferi and
S. schleiferi coagulans predominate; S. aureus may also be
found.

Pathophysiology

K22463_C018.indd 781

23/04/16 1:25 pm

782

Diseases of specific organ systems

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is initially based on the identification of lesions.
Neutrophils and intracellular cocci may be identified from
cytologic (see Figure 18.28) examination of pustule contents
or impression smears from crusts or collarettes. Bacterial
culture and sensitivity of an intact pustule, papule, under a
crust or collarette, or sterile tissue sample should correctly
identify the pathogen to the species level, provided the laboratory is experienced with S. schleiferi, S. pseudintermedius,
and S. aureus identifications. Deep skin scrapings should
always be performed to rule out demodicosis.

Management
After initial suspicion of staphylococcal folliculitis
and appropriate antibiotic therapy for a minimum of
3–4 weeks (Table 18.3), the patient is re-examined while
still receiving antibiotics, with antibiotics continued
1 week past lesion resolution and full hair regrowth. In
cases of recurrent folliculitis, antibiotics should be continued for a minimum of 4–8 weeks, with re-examination
determining when treatment can be stopped. It is important to discern a true recurrence of folliculitis from a
nonresponse based on re-examining patients while they
are still receiving antibiotics. If the folliculitis responds
but quickly relapses once antibiotics are discontinued, antibiotic therapy has not been continued for long
enough. Oxacillin resistance indicates resistance in vivo
to the entire class of β-lactam antibiotics regardless of
in-vitro results. Penicillin binding protein 2a testing can
confirm this result. Daily topical antibacterial therapy is
an important aspect of managing methicillin resistant
infections (1:10 dilute bleach made fresh daily) as an
effective antibiotic may not be available for use or­sideeffects may preclude the use of an otherwise culture sensitive antibiotic. The use of vancomycin or linezolid is not
recommended in veterinary patients. Corticosteroids and
oclacitinib are not recommended in the initial management of folliculitis for three reasons:

Pet owners should be informed of the importance of hand
washing and environmental surface cleaning to reduce
transmission of staphylococcal organisms to susceptible
individuals. The mouth is the recommended site to sample for MRSA investigation.

DEEP PYODERMA AND FURUNCULOSIS
Definition/overview
Deep pyoderma is a bacterial infection of the dermis that
may result from the extension of infection through the
walls of ruptured hair follicles (furunculosis).

Etiology
Deep pyoderma and furunculosis are the result of a hair
follicle rupturing into the dermis, with subsequent liberation of keratin. This liberated keratin acts as a foreign
body within the dermis to perpetuate the cycle of inflammation. Underlying causes of deep pyoderma include
flea bite or food hypersensitivity, AD, demodicosis, hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, obesity, breed, overaggressive grooming, callus trauma, abnormal weight
bearing and ambulation, and idiopathy.

Pathophysiology
Hemorrhagic bullae, ulcers, fibrosis, scarring, and cellulitis with draining fistulous tracts may result (Figure 18.36).

Clinical presentation
Malaise, inappetence, fever, and lymphadenopathy may
be present. Regionalized furunculosis can be noted on
18.36

●● It is important to assess the degree of residual pruritus once the folliculitis has cleared.
●● Corticosteroids may contribute to folliculitis for several months after discontinuation. Relapses are more
common and more severe with corticosteroid usage.
●● Corticosteroids will mask the clinical signs of folliculitis, not allowing adequate assessment of its resolution, and may cause secondary problems.
To minimize the recurrence of folliculitis, the predisposing cause(s) must, if possible, be identified and treated.

K22463_C018.indd 782

Figure 18.36 Interdigital bulla with draining tracts in a 2-yearold Labrador Retriever with staphylococcal furunculosis due to
food hypersensitivity.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

783

the chin (canine chin acne) and at callus, pressure point,
or interdigital areas. Due to their stubby and bristly hair
shafts, shortcoated breeds of dogs may be more prone to
a generalized furunculosis. An acute onset Pseudomonas
furunculosis may occur following bathing or water
immersion.

pseudintermedius and Escherichia coli, whereas in cat bites
these are Pasteurella multocida, β-hemolytic streptococci,
Porphyromonas spp. and Fusobacterium spp. Cellulitis may
develop secondary to demodicosis or abscessed tooth
roots in dogs.

Differential diagnosis

Abscess formation results from tissue damage and local
infection 2–4 days after a traumatic wound when the
wound site becomes promptly sealed.

Demodicosis, nocardiosis, panniculitis (infectious or
sterile), deep fungal infection, mast cell tumor, foreign
body, histiocytosis, sterile granuloma/pyogranuloma
syndrome.

Diagnosis
Sterile preparation of skin for culture and sensitivity of
tissue or an unopened bulla is required to determine a
causative agent. Furunculosis is more often associated
with Staphylococcus spp., but occasionally gram-negative
bacteria may be isolated alone. Finding organisms within
neutrophils or macrophages on cytology of exudate may
aid determination of a causative organism yielded from
culture.

Management
In mixed staphylococcal and gram-negative infections, treating the staphylococci and ignoring the
gram-­
­
negative bacteria is usually adequate. Systemic
antibiotics are often required for 3–6 months and longer, as lesions may relapse if antibiotics are stopped
prematurely (Table 18.3). Occasionally, lesions may
be sterile. Underlying diseases must be investigated.
German Shepherd Dogs can develop a severe, deep
­pyoderma of the hindlimbs and dorsal lumbosacral area.
Topical tacrolimus or oral cyclosporine may be helpful for
sterile lesions. Lifetime therapy with antibacterial shampoos, sprays, wipes, and ointments and oral antibiotics is
often required. Focal areas of interdigital lesions may be
amenable to laser or surgical ablation.

ABSCESSES AND CELLULITIS
Definition/overview
An abscess is a localized collection of purulent material
in the dermis or subcutaneous tissues. Cellulitis is more
extensive and often dissects through tissue layers.

Etiology
Oral or epidermal flora are introduced by inoculation
during penetration of the skin by teeth, claws, or foreign
bodies. In dog bites, typical pathogens are Staphylococcus

K22463_C018.indd 783

Pathophysiology

Clinical presentation
Subcutaneous abscesses and cellulitis are common in cats,
especially intact males. Abscesses are most often present
on the face, limbs, base of the tail, or back, and are the
result of cat bite wounds. Symptoms of fever, lameness,
depression, or pain may be noted.

Differential diagnosis
Penetrating foreign body, panniculitis, nocardiosis or
actinomycosis, subcutaneous and deep mycoses, feline
leprosy, rapidly growing (atypical/opportunistic) mycobacterial infection, canine demodicosis, Rhodococcus or
L-form bacteria, neoplasia, cuterebriasis or dracunculiasis, dermatophytic pseudomycetoma.

Diagnosis
A complete history and examination of the site of the
abscess usually lead to the diagnosis. Recurrent formation
of abscesses necessitates a more thorough investigation
to determine the cause. If an underlying immunosuppression or endocrinopathy is suspected, appropriate
tests should be conducted. Other tests include cytologic
examination of exudate and fungal, mycobacterial, aerobic, and anaerobic bacterial culture and sensitivity of
tissue.

Management
Adequate drainage and amoxicillin–clavulanate should
resolve cat bite abscesses in 10–14 days. Any abscess
that does not heal or recurs should be investigated for
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), feline leukemia
virus (FeLV), and opportunistic mycobacteria, the latter ­especially if present in the inguinal or lumbar areas
(Figure 18.37). Deep tissue wedges (which should include
subcutaneous fat) should be submitted promptly for
mycobacterial culture. Additionally, aerobic, anaerobic,
and fungal culture of tissue may be indicated in recurrent cases. Adding clindamycin or metronidazole to the
therapy can help most anaerobic infections.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

784

Diseases of specific organ systems

18.37

18.38

Figure 18.37 Punctate ulcers and draining tracts on the
ventral abdomen of a 6-year-old Domestic Shorthair cat with
panniculitis due to Mycobacterium smegmatis.

Figure 18.38 Erythematous plaques and nodules in a
1-year-old Persian cat with generalized dermatophytosis and
pseudomycetoma due to Microsporum canis.

FUNGAL AND YEAST INFECTIONS

Differential diagnosis

DERMATOPHYTOSIS
Definition/overview
Dermatophytosis is a fungal infection of the skin, hair, or
claw with zoonotic (or reverse zoonotic) potential.

Etiology
Dermatophytosis is caused by infection with species of
keratinophilic fungi. In dogs and cats the fungi most commonly implicated are Microsporum canis, M. gypseum, and
Trichophyton spp. M. persicolor has been reported.

Pathophysiology
A cell-mediated and humoral response is elicited after
infection. Any type of microtrauma (fleas, mites, aggressive grooming or clipping of hair coat) is a risk factor
for infection when infective spores are present. The
inflammatory reaction leads to increased epidermal proliferation. Persian cats may develop a nodular phase of
furunculosis.

Clinical presentation
In cats, lesions may range from alopecia, scale, miliary
dermatitis, or nodules (dermatophytic pseudomycetoma)
(Figure 18.38) to none at all (asymptomatic carriers).
In dogs, lesions may include papules, pustules, alopecic
nodules (kerion), and draining tracts. Dermatophytosis
is more common in very young or old animals, immunosuppressed animals, and in cattery situations. Yorkshire
Terriers and longhaired cats may be predisposed to
M. canis dermatophytosis.

K22463_C018.indd 784

●● Regional/generalized lesions. In cats: flea bite hypersensitivity, telogen/anagen defluxion, demodicosis,
psychogenic alopecia. In dogs: demodicosis, staphylococcal folliculitis, autoimmune diseases, deep mycotic
lesions.
●● Focal lesions. In cats: cat bite abscess, cheyletiellosis, demodicosis. In dogs: staphylococcal folliculitis,
demodicosis, defects in keratinization, alopecia after
injection.

Diagnosis
Although not a common disease, dermatophytosis is an
overdiagnosed disease when clinical signs or color change
on dermatophyte test medium (DTM) alone are used. Once
hair or scale applied to fungal culture medium exhibits
nonpigmented colony growth concomitant with red color
change, the colony MUST be identified microscopically to
confirm the presence of a dermatophyte. PCR identification of isolates identified as T. mentagrophytes is recommended, as they may be otherwise incorrectly identified.
Nondermatophytes may cause the red color change similar to a dermatophyte (see Figure 18.24). Identification of
the dermatophyte assists the veterinarian, the client, and
the patient in the following ways:

●● It avoids a false-positive diagnosis of dermatophytosis and unnecessary treatment.

●● The source of the dermatophyte may be identified
and removed or treated, and the potential need for
environmental decontamination can be evaluated.
●● Along with signalment and clinical presentation
of the patient, dermatophyte identification guides

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

the selection of appropriate therapy – systemic and
­topical or topical alone.
●● Culture of hair on DTM is recommended for all cats
presented for skin disease and for all dogs with evidence of primary lesions. Culture of tissue is recommended when fungal or hyphal structures present
in tissue cannot be readily identified on histopathologic examination and culture of hair or scale is
negative.

Management
In all cases of generalized dermatophytosis and dermatophytosis in longhaired cats, twice weekly topical treatments (lime sulfur, ketoconazole, miconazole,
climbazole, accelerated hydrogen peroxide, 1:10 bleach,
or enilconazole rinses) should be used together with
systemic antifungal agents (itraconazole, ketoconazole,
fluconazole, or terbinafine). Clipping away affected hair
and burning the clippings is recommended to decrease
environmental and human exposure, but this may not be
needed if thorough application of topical solutions can be
done. Colloidal silver, silver sulfadiazine, hypochlorous
acid, and lufenuron have not been found to be effective
in the treatment and prevention of dermatophytosis.
Treatment should be continued for at least 6 weeks and
until two fungal cultures 1 week apart are negative. In
cases of M. canis infection, to prevent fomite carriage,
false-positive fungal cultures, and decrease transmission
risk, owners should mechanically remove debris from the
environment and wash all surfaces once or twice weekly
with 1:10 bleach or accelerated hydrogen peroxide (products with label efficacy for T. mentagrophytes), allowing
a 10 minute contact time. Patient confinement to easily
cleaned areas is helpful.

MALASSEZIA DERMATITIS

785

glucocorticoid therapy, and breed (Terriers, Basset Hound,
Poodle, American Cocker Spaniel, Shih Tzu, Dachshund,
English Setter).

Pathophysiology
The precise pathogenesis is unclear, although
M. pachydermatis thrives in areas of skin with increased
lipid content and may be more prevalent in geographic
regions where ambient humidity is high.

Clinical presentation
Moist, erythematous, hyperpigmented, lichenified (acanthosis nigricans) lesions typify those of Malassezia dermatitis and are often located in the ventral neck fold,
axilla, lip fold, ears, claw folds, and interdigital spaces
(Figure 18.39). Pruritus is present and often constant.
Malassezia dermatitis in cats may be associated with
hypersensitivities, otitis externa, feline acne, generalized keratinization defects, FIV, thymoma, and exfoliative
erythroderma.

Differential diagnosis
Demodicosis, AD, flea bite hypersensitivity, food hypersensitivity, sarcoptic mange, staphylococcal folliculitis,
idiopathic defects in keratinization, cutaneous adverse
drug reaction, allergic contact dermatitis, cutaneous
T-cell (epitheliotropic) lymphoma.

Diagnosis
Peanut-shaped budding yeasts are visible on acetate tape
preparations from affected skin (see Figure 18.25). While
numbers per high-power (×100) field should be noted, the
presence of any yeast in a clinically affected dog merits
treatment.
18.39

Definition/overview
Malassezia dermatitis is a pruritic condition associated
with the presence of the yeast Malassezia pachydermatis.

Etiology
Increased numbers of yeast organisms or a hypersensitivity to surface yeast may be associated with diseases
that may induce seborrheic conditions on the skin.
Predisposing factors for Malassezia dermatitis include
hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, flea bite hypersensitivity, food hypersensitivity, AD, staphylococcal
folliculitis, primary keratinization disorders, long-term

K22463_C018.indd 785

Figure 18.39 Erythematous pododermatitis due to Malassezia
pachydermatis in a 10-year-old Poodle with hypothyroidism.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

786

Diseases of specific organ systems

18.40

Management
Topical degreasing shampoos and antifungal treatment
with oral ketoconazole, fluconazole, itraconazole, or terbinafine is necessary. It is important to investigate and
correct underlying diseases, as mentioned above, to minimize recurrence.

PARASITIC DERMATOSES
CANINE DEMODICOSIS
Definition/overview
Demodicosis, an intrafollicular parasitic disease caused
by demodicid mites, is probably the most serious
­non-­neoplastic dermatologic condition in animals.

Etiology
Demodicosis is caused by Demodex canis, D. folliculorum,
and D. injai. A hereditary factor predisposes an animal to
develop juvenile-onset demodicosis.

Pathophysiology
Typically, the mites reside in the hair follicles, although
some have been found in apocrine and sebaceous glands
adjacent to follicles. Mites feed mostly on follicular debris
and cells and occasionally on sebum. It seems that lymphocyte suppression, possibly influenced by secondary
bacterial infection, allows the mites to proliferate.

Clinical presentation
Lesions comprise one or several areas of either scaling,
thinning of hair, hyperpigmentation, alopecia, or erythema with alopecia (Figure 18.40). Lesions may appear
on any part of the body, but typically affect the face and
forelimbs. About 10% of localized cases progress to generalized disease. Juvenile-onset demodicosis is limited to
onset at <18–24 months of age and is considered hereditary. Adult-onset demodicosis occurs after 2 years of age
and is often associated with an underlying disease (iatrogenic or endogenous hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism, infectious diseases).

Differential diagnosis
Color dilution alopecia, alopecia areata, sebaceous adenitis, staphylococcal folliculitis or furunculosis, injection
site reaction, deep fungal infection, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, pemphigus foliaceus, cutaneous adverse drug
reaction, sterile granuloma/pyogranuloma syndrome,
zinc-responsive dermatosis, dermatophytosis, Malassezia
dermatitis, endocrine or keratinization disorders.

K22463_C018.indd 786

Figure 18.40 Patch of perifollicular hyperpigmentation and
comedones in a 5-year-old Afghan Hound with adult-onset
generalized demodicosis.

Diagnosis
Determining the extent of disease in demodicosis is one
of the most important steps in diagnosis. Acquiring deep
skin scrapings and hair plucks from five body sites is
helpful in determining the extent of disease (lip fold, foreand hindfeet, two additional areas – preferably lesions)
(Table 18.4). Noting which life cycle stages are present
and their relative numbers can give the veterinarian
an idea as to the activity of the disease (Figure 18.41)
(numerous eggs, few adults – active disease; numerous
dead adults, no eggs – less active disease, potentially a
better prognosis).
Generalized disease involves positive skin scrapings
from more than one body region. Localized disease is
limited to a few lesions in one body region. Skin scrape
sites can be re-scraped biweekly to assess response to
therapy. A skin biopsy may be necessary in the Shar
Pei and in cases of pododermatitis if skin scrapings are
negative.

Management
The most effective therapies to date include topical amitraz weekly (250 ppm), oral milbemycin daily (2 mg/kg),
and oral or parenteral ivermectin daily (300–600 µg/kg).
Ivermectin sensitive animals can be identified by testing (www.vetmed.wsu.edu/depts-VCPL/test.aspx). Topical
imidacloprid–moxidectin weekly has also been effective. Appropriate miticidal therapy should be continued
until three consecutive negative deep skin scrapings
are achieved 2 weeks apart, rather than until the dog is
clinically normal. Affected animals should be neutered
as soon as practical and prior to complete resolution of
disease.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

787

Table 18.4 Common external parasites affecting the skin of dogs and cats.
Parasite

Depth of skin scraping

Location

Treatment

Cheyletiella

S

Trunk

I, P, L, A, I-M, F

Notoedres

S

Head

I, L, A, I-M

Sarcoptes

S

Ear margin, elbows, hocks

I, L, M, A, Se, I-M

Otodectes

S

Head, rump

I, P, I-M

Demodex (dog)

D*

Face, feet, trunk

I, M, A, I-M

Demodex (cat)

D, S

Head, trunk

A, L, I-M

S, superficial; D, deep; I, ivermectin; P, pyrethrin; L, lime sulfur; A, amitraz; I-M, imidacloprid–moxidectin; M, milbemycin; F, fipronil;
Se, selamectin.
*, hair plucks are also useful.

18.41

abnormality. Corticosteroids, cyclosporine A, and oclacitinib are contraindicated in dogs with any form of
demodicosis.

FELINE DEMODICOSIS
Definition/overview
Feline demodicosis is an uncommon parasitic disease
caused by increased numbers of demodicid mites in
the skin.

Etiology

Figure 18.41 Adult and larval stages of Demodex canis.

Identifying and treating secondary bacterial infections
helps minimize them as a contributing factor of demodicosis. When furunculosis is present, intact bulla or tissue
culture with antibiotic sensitivity is financially prudent
due to the long duration of antibiotic therapy required.
Generalized juvenile-onset demodicosis is hereditary and can be a serious and expensive disease to treat.
Fifteen percent of dogs will never be cured. All dogs with
juvenile-onset generalized demodicosis must be neutered
as soon as practical. Dogs treated for localized demodicosis with systemic agents intended for generalized disease
should also be neutered. This may be especially important with the use of afoxolaner and fluralaner medications
in young dogs. Dogs from litters affected by demodicosis
should not be bred. Mature dogs that develop generalized demodicosis may have an associated endocrine

K22463_C018.indd 787

Feline demodicosis is caused by a follicular mite Demodex
cati (which looks similar to D. canis), a surface mite D. gatoi
(shorter with a blunt, rounded abdomen), and an as yet
unnamed species larger than D. gatoi (Figure 18.42). An
inapparent carrier state and contagiousness between cats
has been reported with D. gatoi.

Pathophysiology
Some cases of feline demodicosis caused by D. cati have
been associated with food hypersensitivity, feline acne,
FIV, diabetes mellitus, and actinic dermatitis.

Clinical presentation
Cats may present with pruritus and hair pulling, localized
or symmetrical alopecia, erythema, and excoriations.

Differential diagnosis
Staphylococcal folliculitis/furunculosis, psychogenic alopecia, dermatophytosis, AD, food hypersensitivity, flea
bite hypersensitivity, infestation with Cheyletiella spp. or
Notoedres cati, contact dermatitis.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

788

Diseases of specific organ systems

18.43

18.42

Figure 18.42 Adult mite of Demodex gatoi. (Courtesy
S.R. Merchant)

Figure 18.43 Pinnal alopecia due to canine scabies in a
Labrador Retriever.

Diagnosis
If superficial skin scrapings are negative for D. gatoi, consider fecal floatation and scraping other household cats,
as they may be asymptomatic carriers. Deep skin scrapings are necessary for D. cati identification.

18.44

Management
Topical treatment with weekly imidacloprid–­moxidexctin
or 2% lime sulfur, or daily oral ivermectin should be considered in any cat that presents with the above symptoms
and continued for 6 weeks. Failing this, 125 ppm amitraz
may be used weekly as a dip and continued for 3 weeks
after a skin scraping has given negative results. All cats
in the household should be treated simultaneously when
D. gatoi is found or suspected. Occasionally, pruritus may
persist after mites are no longer present, possibly due
to a persistent hypersensitivity response or to what has
become a compulsive behavior. A short course of oral glucocorticoids after miticidal therapy may stop the excessive grooming behavior.

CANINE SCABIES
Definition/overview
Canine scabies (sarcoptic mange) is a contagious dermatosis of dogs, and rarely cats, caused by the mite Sarcoptes
scabiei var. canis.

Etiology
Caused by the highly contagious mite S. scabiei var. canis,
sarcoptic mange is one of the most pruritic skin diseases
of dogs. The mite has also been reported to cause disease
in cats, foxes, and humans.

Pathophysiology
Most of the pruritus may be caused by a hypersensitivity
reaction to the mite and its secretions.

K22463_C018.indd 788

Figure 18.44 Adult Sarcoptes scabiei var. canis mite.

Clinical presentation
Canine scabies is a ventrally distributed disease, with
the ear margins, elbows, hocks, and abdomen typically
involved (Figure 18.43). The pinnal–pedal reflex may be
positive in 25–90% of dogs with scabies (see Figure 18.20).

Differential diagnosis
Flea bite hypersensitivity, AD, food hypersensitivity,
Malassezia dermatitis, otodectic dermatitis, cheyletiellosis, Pelodera strongyloides dermatitis.

Diagnosis
Apart from puppies, fewer than 25–50% of dogs with
symptoms of sarcoptic mange are positive for mites on
superficial skin scrapings (Figure 18.44). The diagnosis is often ultimately made by response to appropriate
therapy. Although ELISA serology is not perfect and may
result in treatment delay, a negative result has high predictive value.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

789

Management

Differential diagnosis

The most effective therapies are topical lime sulfur rinses
(weekly × 6), ivermectin (PO, pour-on, or SC weekly × 4),
milbemycin (every other day for 14 days or weekly × 4),
selamectin or imidacloprid–moxidectin (three times,
2 weeks apart), and topical amitraz rinses (weekly × 6). All
in-contact animals must be treated, as well as the environment, fomites, and bedding.

Foreign bodies, bacterial infection, Malassezia infection, Pseudomonas spp. infection, defects in keratinization, ­
autoimmune diseases, hypersensitivities,
dermatophytosis.

OTODECTIC ACARIASIS
Definition/overview
Otodectic acariasis is a contagious, parasitic, zoonotic,
otic, or cutaneous disease caused by the psoroptid mite
Otodectes cynotis.

Etiology
O. cynotis is the most common cause of otitis externa in
young cats. Its incidence in dogs is lower. The mites can
also transiently affect humans.

Pathophysiology
Otodectes mites feed on epidermal debris and tissue fluid,
exposing the host to mite antigen. The ear canal epidermis becomes irritated, producing excessive cerumen and
blood.

Clinical presentation
Ear pruritus with black, granular debris in the external
ear canal is a common symptom. O. cynotis may also exist
outside of the ear canal and be a cause of head and tail
pruritus, especially in cats (Figure 18.45). Papules, crusts,
and excoriations may be evident.

18.45

Figure 18.45 Tail alopecia and scale due to Otodectes cynotis
dermatitis in a cat. (Courtesy C.S. Foil)

K22463_C018.indd 789

Diagnosis
Diagnosis may be made by visualization of the mites in
the ear canal, mineral oil ear swabs, or on skin scrapings
or acetate tape preparations (Figure 18.46). However,
mites may be difficult to demonstrate in the ear canal,
as immunity to the salivary antigens of the mite may
develop and the ensuing inflammation may destroy the
mites or cause them to leave the ear canal.

Management
Aural and topical parasiticides applied to the ears and
entire body, respectively, at varying intervals, for a total
of 30 days are required. Ivermectin (oral weekly, pour-on
or SC biweekly), selamectin, and imidacloprid–­moxidectin
biweekly are also effective. All in-contact animals must
be treated as well.

CHEYLETIELLOSIS
Definition/overview
Cheyletiellosis is a variably pruritic, contagious, and zoonotic dermatosis of dogs and cats caused by Cheyletiella
spp. mites living on the skin surface.

Etiology
Cheyletiella yasguri (dogs), C. blakei (cats), and C. parasitovorax (rabbits) are obligate parasites that may travel freely
among various host species.

18.46

Figure 18.46 Adult Otodectes cynotis mite from the ear of a cat.
(Courtesy E. Greiner)

23/04/16 1:25 pm

790

Diseases of specific organ systems

Pathophysiology

Management

The mites live in the keratin layer, moving rapidly in
pseudotunnels of epidermal debris and periodically
attaching themselves to pierce the skin and engorge with
tissue fluid and lymph. Eggs are bound to hairs. When
eggs are shed, they can act as an environmental reservoir of infection.

The infested animal’s bedding and all fomites should
be treated with a pyrethroid-containing product. All
in-contact animals should also be treated. Weekly
­
­pyrethroid (caution in cats) or lime sulfur rinses, biweekly
ivermectin (oral or injectable), selamectin, ­imidacloprid–
moxidectin, fipronil (not for use in rabbits), or milbemycin weekly have been effective when used for 6–8 weeks.
If nasal sequestration of mites occurs, ivermectin should
be considered.

Clinical presentation
Symptoms can range from none to intense pruritus with
or without dorsal scaling, papules, or crusts (Figure 18.47).
Through grooming, cats may efficiently remove scale,
mites, and eggs, initially leaving only alopecia.

Differential diagnosis
Flea bite hypersensitivity, pediculosis, demodicosis, otodectic acariasis, keratinization disorder, intestinal parasitism, malnutrition, scabies, food hypersensitivity.

Diagnosis
Direct observation of mobile mites in scale collected
from the affected animal and placed on a dark surface
(‘walking dandruff’) is diagnostic. Mites and eggs can
be difficult to detect, but they may be found on microscopic examination of superficial skin scrapings, on acetate tape impression placed on a mineral oil slide, or on
fecal floatation. A negative result does not rule out the
possibility of Cheyletiella infestation. The adult mites
have characteristic crescent-shaped hooks on the accessory mouthparts (see Figure 18.26). Lack of response
to appropriate therapy may lessen the likelihood of
cheyletiellosis.

TROMBICULOSIS
Definition/overview
Trombiculosis is a pruritic, papular, crusting dermatitis caused by species of mites (chiggers) of the family
Trombiculidae.

Etiology
The six-legged larval stage (Figure 18.48) infests dogs
and cats from summer through autumn/fall. Species
involved include Neotrombicula autumnalis (harvest
mite), Eutrombicula alfreddugesi (North American chigger), Walchia americana, Leptotrombidium subquadratum
(S. Africa), and Straelensia cynotis.

Pathophysiology
Adult chigger mites live in decaying plant material. The
six-legged red larvae are parasitic and feed on animals,
causing severe irritation.

18.48

18.47

Figure 18.47 Large scale associated with Cheyletiella in the hair
coat of a dog. (Case material UFVMC)

K22463_C018.indd 790

Figure 18.48 Larval stage of the chigger mite Eutrombicula
cinabaris. (Courtesy E. Greiner and C. Welbourn)

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

791

Clinical presentation

Clinical presentation

Papules and crusts with intense or little pruritus are present in body areas in contact with the ground (feet, head,
ears, ventrum). The red larvae may be noted as well.

AD usually affects young adult dogs (onset at 1–3 years
old), with initially a seasonal pruritus. It is important to
discern the presence, intensity, and frequency of itch in
the absence of infection; the aspect, distribution, and progression of cutaneous lesions; flea eradication programs;
and previous treatment and effect. Pruritus (usually
corticosteroid responsive) should be evident and affect
one or more of the following areas: face, extensor and
flexor skin surfaces, axilla, pinna, anal, or inguinal area
(Figure 18.49).

Differential diagnosis
Insects and other causes of pruritus, AD, food hypersensitivity, allergic contact dermatitis, demodicosis, staphylococcal folliculitis, dermatophytosis.

Diagnosis
Finding the red larvae at affected areas is diagnostic.
Affected animals will have a history of environmental
contact, but careful examination may be necessary to find
the mite larvae in thick coated pets. Microscopic examination in mineral oil will allow identification of the mites.

Management
Treatment with ectoparasiticidal sprays is effective.
A short course of oral glucocorticoid can be used if pruritus is severe. Weekly or biweekly application of 0.25%
fipronil spray or oral ivermectin can help prevent reinfestation in animals with continued exposure to the mites.

HYPERSENSITIVITIES
CANINE ATOPIC DERMATITIS
Definition/overview
AD results from a genetic predisposition to become sensitized to environmental allergens.

Etiology
Canine AD is a multifaceted disease due to a combination of genetic and environmental factors affecting the
immune response and skin barrier function.

Differential diagnosis
Sarcoptic mange, cheyletiellosis, pediculosis, contact
allergic dermatitis, food hypersensitivity, flea bite hypersensitivity, Pelodera strongyloides dermatitis, Malassezia
dermatitis, staphylococcal folliculitis, xerosis.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of AD is based on compatible historical and
clinical information, as well as ruling out infections,
infestations, and food hypersensitivity. Secondary diseases (e.g. otitis externa/media, staphylococcal folliculitis, acute moist dermatitis, keratinization disorder,
Malassezia dermatitis, flea bite hypersensitivity [common
in dogs with AD], acral lick dermatitis [ALD], and fibropruritic nodules [noted in some dogs with flea bite hypersensitivity]) may also contribute to the pruritic threshold
in the atopic patient, and these can be recurrent problems
that must be continually addressed. Intradermal allergy
testing (IDAT) is used to prepare allergen-specific immunotherapy (ASIT), not to diagnose AD. Serum allergy
18.49

Pathophysiology
The pathophysiology is still unclear in animals. Defective
epidermal barrier function allows environmental allergens to penetrate the skin. A decrease in transforming
growth factor beta (TGFβ) could lead to a lack of tolerance to the allergens, allergen processing by Langerhans
cells and activation of T helper (Th)-2 lymphocytes.
Subsequent overproduction of interleukin-4 and B-cell
class switching increases allergen-specific IgE. Mast cell
degranulation leads to cutaneous inflammation which
causes self-trauma, secondary infections, and further
inflammation via Th-1 lymphocytes.

K22463_C018.indd 791

Figure 18.49 Periocular alopecia, hyperpigmentation, and
lichenification in a 3-year-old Jack Russell Terrier with atopic
dermatitis.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

792

Diseases of specific organ systems

testing by competent laboratories may be used if IDAT is
unavailable.

Management
Allergen avoidance is difficult at best. ASIT is preferred
over long-term symptomatic therapy as it is a more specific therapy, side-effects are less likely to occur, and it
is the only therapy with the potential for a ‘cure’ in 15%
of patients. Allergy symptoms tend to become yearround in many climates. Sublingual or subcutaneous
ASIT based on IDAT is effective in decreasing pruritus
or reducing the need for other medications in 60–80%
of dogs, although results can take up to 12 months.

ASIT promotes production of Treg cells and tolerance to
­allergens. It is ideal to begin ASIT early in the course of
the disease. Serum IgE allergy testing results vary widely
between and within laboratories. Ceramide application
is an important aspect of skin barrier repair in people,
although studies on clinical efficacy are lacking in dogs.
Symptomatic therapy includes the use of antihistamines (Table 18.5) and essential fatty acids (EFAs);
a novel single-protein prescription or home-cooked diet;
topical antipruritic therapy (colloidal oatmeal, glucocorticoid, capsaicin, pramoxine, tacrolimus); oral alternate
day corticosteroids; oral pentoxifylline, ­
cyclosporine,
or oclacitinib; frequent cool water baths to remove

Table 18.5 Antihistamine therapy for dermatologic disorders.

Generic

Species

Dose
(mg/kg)

Route

Interval
(hours)

Amitriptyline

C

0.5–1

PO

12–24

D

1–2

PO

12

C

1 (or 5 mg/cat)

PO

12–24

D

1 (or 10–20 mg/dog)

PO

12–24

C

2–4 mg/cat

PO

8–12

D

4–8 mg/dog

PO

8–12

C

0.34–0.68 mg/cat

PO

12

D

0.05–1.5

PO

12

C

0.25–1

PO

12–24

D

2–4

PO

24 or ÷ 12

C

1–4 mg/cat

PO

12–24

D

0.5–2

PO

8–12

Diphenhydramine

B

2–4

PO

8–12

Doxepin

C

0.5–1

PO

12–24

D

0.5–5 (max 50 mg/
dog)

PO

12

C

10–15 mg/cat

PO

12–24

D

2–5 (up to 18)

PO

12–24

Hydroxyzine

B

2

PO

12

Loratadine

C

5 mg/cat

PO

24

D

0.5

PO

24

D

1 tablet/5 kg

PO

12–24–48

Cetirizine

Chlorpheniramine

Clemastine

Clomipramine

Cyproheptadine

Fexofenadine

Trimeprazole+prednisolone

D, dog; C, cat; B, dog and cat; PO, per os.

K22463_C018.indd 792

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

environmental allergens; as well as managing s­ econdary
staphylococcal and Malassezia skin or ear infections.
Short-term oral oclacitinib antipruritic therapy may be
especially useful to allow appropriate corticosteroid and
antihistamine withdrawal prior to IDAT. Affected dogs
should not be used for breeding.

793

cynotis, biotin deficiency, EFA deficiency, intestinal
­parasite ­hypersensitivity, staphylococcal folliculitis, dermatophytosis, Malassezia dermatitis, demodicosis.

Diagnosis

Definition/overview

As in the dog, a careful clinical history, physical examination, and ruling out of infectious and other allergic causes
of pruritus assist in the diagnosis of AD in the cat. IDAT
can identify allergens for oral or sublingual ASIT and the
best opportunity for treatment success.

AD is an inherited predisposition to develop hypersensitivity to inhaled or percutaneously absorbed allergens.

Management

FELINE ATOPIC DERMATITIS

Etiology
Feline AD results from a genetic tendency to become sensitized to environmental allergens.

Pathophysiology
Although the pathogenesis of AD is unclear in cats, it has
immune dysfunction similarities to canine and human AD.

EFA supplementation, antihistamines, intermittent oral
or topical glucocorticoids, oral cyclosporine A, ASIT, antibiotics and antifungals to control secondary cutaneous
infections, as well as enhanced flea eradication, afford an
animal every opportunity to improve. Topical tacrolimus
or oral pentoxifylline may be useful as well. ASIT may be
beneficial in patients with asthma.

FLEA BITE HYPERSENSITIVITY

Clinical presentation
Feline AD causes a variety of clinical signs. Symmetrical
alopecia, miliary dermatitis, eosinophilic plaques, indolent ulcer, pruritus of the head, neck, ventral abdomen,
limbs, feet, and generalized pruritus are most commonly
noted (Figure 18.50). Onset of clinical signs usually occurs
between 1 and 3 years of age and rarely before 1 year.
Domestic mixed, Abyssinian, and Devon Rex breeds may
be overrepresented.

Definition/overview
Flea bite hypersensitivity is a pruritic dermatosis due to
an immediate and/or delayed cell-mediated response to
several proteins present in flea saliva.

Etiology

Differential diagnosis

Hypersensitivity to Ctenocephalides felis felis is probably
the most common and the most underdiagnosed cause of
skin disease in dogs and cats worldwide.

Flea bite hypersensitivity, food hypersensitivity,
Notoedres cati, cheyletiellosis, pediculosis, Otodectes

Pathophysiology

18.50

An immediate type I hypersensitivity, a late phase IgEmediated reaction, a cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity, and a delayed cell-mediated hypersensitivity may all
be responsible for flea bite hypersensitivity.

Clinical presentation

Figure 18.50 Erythema, excoriations, and alopecia in the axilla
of a 4-year-old Domestic Shorthair cat with atopic dermatitis.
(Case material UFVMC)

K22463_C018.indd 793

Clinical signs in the dog include a papular, pruritic ­
dermatitis of the tailhead, lumbar, perineum,
hindlimb, dorsal antebrachium, or umbilical areas.
Fibropruritic nodules and pyotraumatic dermatitis may
be present on the dorsal and lateral trunk. In the cat,
symptoms may be similar or include miliary dermatitis, symmetric alopecia, indolent ulcer, and eosinophilic
plaque.
Common secondary problems include otitis externa
and staphylococcal folliculitis. A vigilance for these
problems, as well as enhanced flea eradication, must be

23/04/16 1:25 pm

794

Diseases of specific organ systems

maintained in order to keep pruritus below its threshold
in the flea hypersensitive pet.

Differential diagnosis
Cheyletiellosis, pediculosis, sarcoptic mange, trombiculosis, staphylococcal folliculitis, ectopic Otodectes cynotis
infestation, Lynxacarus radovsky infestation, dermatophytosis, food hypersensitivity.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is achieved ultimately by resolution of symptoms with enhanced flea eradication. Improvement may
be expected after 3 months. Many of the newer flea adulticides, combined with insect development inhibitors
or insect growth regulators, make flea eradication quite
feasible in a closed environment, although monthly
administration is not sufficient. A diagnosis supportive
of flea bite hypersensitivity can be made with compatible clinical signs, the presence of fleas or flea feces, recent
evidence of Dipylidium caninum, or a positive intradermal skin or serum allergy test. Absence of fleas does not
eliminate flea bite hypersensitivity as a diagnosis. Other
household pets should be inspected for fleas, and inquiries made about feral cats and local wildlife that carry
fleas into the environment.
Evidence of fleas will be difficult to find in the flea
hypersensitive patient. An animal that displays a negative immediate intradermal allergy test (IDAT) with
flea antigen may still be hypersensitive. The patient can
be observed for delayed IDAT reactions in 24–48 hours.
Because of the unavailability of an effective flea repellent, it is very difficult to rule out flea bite hypersensitivity as the cause of an animal’s skin disease.

Management
By virtue of their constant obsessive grooming, pruritic
animals remove most fleas from themselves. An adult flea
survives less than 24–48 hours on an allergic animal. Even
very minimal exposure to flea saliva may be sufficient to
perpetuate pruritus in the hypersensitive patient. Other
animals (especially cats and wildlife) as well as humans
may carry adult fleas into the environment and seed the
environment with pre-adult fleas, which then emerge
continuously to affect the allergic pet. All animals in the
environment must be included in the flea eradication plan.
Topical flea products with repellent activity are required
in many hypersensitive dogs. Environmental flea eradication is often necessary as well. Secondary bacterial and
yeast infections must be continually identified and controlled. The judicious use of short-term topical and oral

K22463_C018.indd 794

glucocorticoids can relieve intense and excessive pruritus,
but larger dosages are often required with each successive
flea season. Oral oclacitinib or microemulsified cyclosporine A may be beneficial in some patients with low flea
numbers.

ALLERGIC CONTACT DERMATITIS
Definition/overview
Allergic contact dermatitis is a papular, macular dermatosis of sparsely haired body regions.

Etiology
The condition results from an individual predisposition
to develop sensitivity to contactants.

Pathophysiology
Allergic contact dermatitis is a cell-mediated, type IV
hypersensitivity reaction to percutaneous absorption
of environmental or medicinal haptens (fibers, topical medications [e.g. neomycin], nickel, cement, plants
[e.g. Commelinaceae], dog foods [rice flour]).

Clinical presentation
Erythematous macules and papules (Figure 18.51) may
be present at the muzzle, ventral interdigital, perineal,
pinnal, axillary, or inguinal areas depending on the
nature of the offending agent. Pruritus is often marked.

Differential diagnosis
Irritant contact dermatitis, AD, food hypersensitivity,
Malassezia dermatitis, staphylococcal folliculitis, dermatophytosis, demodicosis, scabies, insect hypersensitivity,
pemphigus, hookworm dermatitis, Pelodera dermatitis.

18.51

Figure 18.51 Multifocal papules and erythema on the ventral
abdomen of a 5-year-old Golden Retriever with allergic contact
dermatitis. (Case material UFVMC)

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on history, clinical signs, excluding
other diseases, provocative testing, patch testing, and histopathology of lesions.

795

hypersensitivities including atopic, flea bite, contact, and
endoparasitic dermatitis.
18.52

Management
The animal must be prevented from contacting the
offending agent. Pentoxifylline (15–30 mg/kg PO q8h)
has been useful in preventing the allergic reaction when
given 48 hours prior to exposure. A favorable response
can be seen with oral cyclosporine (5 mg/kg PO q24h).
Corticosteroids may give symptomatic relief but usually
require higher doses over time. Systemic antibiotics and
antifungals may be necessary for secondary bacterial
and yeast infections.

FOOD HYPERSENSITIVITY

Figure 18.52 Erythematous pododermatitis in a dog with food
hypersensitivity.

Definition/overview

18.53

Food hypersensitivity is a nonseasonal hypersensitivity
caused by a dietary substance.

Etiology
Food hypersensitivity is an abnormal immunologic
response to an ingested food ingredient, flavoring, or
additive.

Pathophysiology
While the pathomechanism of food hypersensitivity is
not clear, complex immediate and delayed hypersensitivity reactions are incriminated. Food hypersensitivity is not usually associated with a change in diet. Most
patients have been eating the offending diet for over
2 years.
Foodstuffs most commonly incriminated include: beef,
dairy products, lamb, poultry products, wheat, soy, corn,
rice, and eggs in dogs; and fish, dairy products, beef, and
eggs in cats.

Figure 18.53 Erythematous wheals on the neck of a dog with
food hypersensitivity.
18.54

Clinical presentation
Self-trauma and secondary staphylococcal folliculitis
and Malassezia dermatitis may be evident; however,
food hypersensitivity is not always dramatically pruritic (Figures 18.52, 18.53). Symptoms may mimic flea
bite hypersensitivity. Otitis externa or a recurrent staphylococcal folliculitis or Malassezia dermatitis may be
the only symptom. Cats commonly display pruritus of
the head and neck (Figure 18.54). Pruritus may or may
not be responsive to glucocorticoids. Between 19% and
35% of dogs and 21–30% of cats may have concurrent

K22463_C018.indd 795

Figure 18.54 Erosions and ulceration on the dorsum of
the head and neck in a Domestic Shorthair cat with food
hypersensitivity. (Case material UFVMC)

23/04/16 1:25 pm

796

Diseases of specific organ systems

Common secondary problems in food hypersensitive
patients include otitis externa, keratinization disorders,
anal pruritus, staphylococcal folliculitis, and Malassezia
dermatitis.

Differential diagnosis
Dogs: flea bite hypersensitivity, cutaneous adverse drug
reaction, AD, ectoparasitism, staphylococcal folliculitis,
allergic contact dermatitis, defects in keratinization. Cats:
flea bite hypersensitivity, cutaneous adverse drug reaction, ectoparasitism, AD, dermatophytosis, idiopathic
miliary dermatitis, psychogenic alopecia, staphylococcal
folliculitis, feline acne.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis can only be achieved by resolution of symptoms while the patient receives a reliable, novel protein
diet (a protein and carbohydrate source that has not
been fed previously) over a period of 6–12 weeks. Overthe-counter diets are not recommended due to the potential for ingredient cross-contamination. Secondary skin
infections and otitis media must be appropriately identified and resolved prior to, or in the early phase of, a
food trial. Nutritionally balanced home-cooked diets are
ideal, as they do not contain preservatives or other additives. Treats, human food, chew toys, flavored nutritional
supplements, flavored antibiotics, toothpastes, and flavored heartworm or flea preventives must be discontinued or replaced during the trial diet. Cats with access to
the outdoors are unable to reliably complete a food trial.
Provocation confirms the diagnosis. Animals should be
challenged with their old diet and observed for 1–14 days
(or longer depending on original symptom recurrence
rate) for an exacerbation of symptoms (otitis, folliculitis,
pruritus). Serum, hair, or saliva testing for food allergy is
invalid.

Etiology
Lesions are the direct result of mosquito bites.

Pathophysiology
An underlying immediate and delayed hypersensitivity
reaction to mosquito antigen results in a diffuse eosinophilic dermatitis with collagen degeneration.

Clinical presentation
Cats present with alopecic, erosive, ulcerative patches on
the bridge of their nose, which may extend to the nasal
planum (Figure 18.55). Additional lesions may be present
at the lateral elbows, periorbital areas, footpads, and ear
pinnae. Indoor or outdoor cats may be affected.

Differential diagnosis
Pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus erythematosus, AD, food
hypersensitivity, flea bite hypersensitivity, dermatophytosis, demodicosis, herpesvirus, squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC), mast cell tumor, CLE, cryptococcosis, idiopathic
eosinophilic granuloma.

Diagnosis
The history of a seasonal dermatitis, exposure to mosquitoes, and histopathology of the lesion is diagnostic.

Management
Prevention of exposure to mosquitoes is ideal. Mosquito
repellents may be helpful and include pyrethrin-based

18.55

Management
Management depends on identification of the allergen,
as determined by provocation studies. The diet should
be complete and balanced and highly digestible, containing limited antigens and none of the offending
ingredient(s).

MOSQUITO BITE HYPERSENSITIVITY
Definition/overview
Mosquito bite hypersensitivity is a local hypersensitivity
response of cats to mosquito bites.

K22463_C018.indd 796

Figure 18.55 Erosions and ulceration of the nasal planum and
bridge of the nose in a Domestic Shorthair cat with mosquito
bite hypersensitivity.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

797

18.56

gel or picaridin solution. Other non-DEET products must
be applied several times daily (10% citronella, cedar,
and lemongrass oils or 2% soybean oil). Oral or repositol
­corticosteroids will temporarily resolve the lesions.

CORNIFICATION DISORDERS
CANINE SEBORRHEA
Definition/overview
Canine seborrhea is a symptom of chronic disease characterized by scaliness, greasiness, and, often, inflammation
of the skin. Disorder of cornification (DOC) is the preferred terminology.

Etiology
The proliferation, differentiation, or desquamation of the
surface and follicular epidermis can be altered by any
disease affecting the skin (secondary DOC) or it may be
an inherited primary DOC.

Pathophysiology
Although incompletely understood, the inflammation is
due to numerous causes: endocrinopathies (iatrogenic or
endogenous); deficiency, excess, or imbalance of essential nutrients; variation in transepidermal water loss. An
alteration of lipid content of skin may affect the production and maintenance of the epidermis and sebaceous
glands (secondary seborrhea). Primary seborrhea is an
­inherited DOC (e.g. vitamin A-responsive dermatosis).

Clinical presentation
Primary DOC begins at a young age and is seen in certain
breeds (American Cocker and English Springer Spaniels,
Labrador Retrievers, West Highland White Terriers,
German Shepherd Dogs, Basset Hounds, Dachshunds,
Shar Peis, and Schnauzers). Secondary DOC begins at the
age that the underlying disease begins (Figure 18.56).
Seborrheic dermatitis presents with greasiness and/or
flakiness complicated by inflammation. Generalized or
localized erythema, lichenification, hyperkeratosis, scale,
and crust often affect body fold areas (lip, neck, antecubital, axillary, inguinal, interdigital, flank, anterior hock).
Pruritus is usually only present with hypersensitivities
and/or staphylococcal folliculitis or Malassezia dermatitis. Ceruminous otitis externa is common.

Differential diagnosis
Primary (inherited defect in cornification [e.g. vitamin
A-responsive, ichthyosis]) vs. secondary to underlying

K22463_C018.indd 797

Figure 18.56 Secondary seborrhea (alopecia,
hyperpigmentation, lichenification, Malassezia dermatitis)
due to atopic dermatitis in a German Shepherd Dog.
(Case material UFVMC)

diseases: hypersensitivities (flea, food, atopic dermatitis);
external parasites (Demodex, Cheyletiella, Sarcoptes), leishmaniasis; endocrine (hypothyroidism, iatrogenic or endogenous hyperadrenocorticism, h
­yperestrogenism, hyper-/
hypoandrogenism); malnutrition secondary to internal
parasites; lipid abnormalities (diet, pancreatic insufficiency,
liver disease, malabsorption, or other systemic disease),
staphylococcal folliculitis, dermatophytosis, Malassezia dermatitis, excessive bathing (low or high humidity); cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, paraneoplastic syndromes.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on breed, age of onset, and identification of, or ruling out, secondary causes of seborrhea.
A skin biopsy, when infections are cleared, may reveal
characteristic features of an underlying or primary disease but often may not.

Management
Identifying and correcting underlying diseases and
infections are paramount. The use of degreasing, but
not overly drying, shampoos or moisturizing agents,
as well as necessary antimicrobial systemic and aural
agents, are the mainstay of therapy and may be required
for an extended period of time. Clipping the hair coat
often allows more effective visualization and topical
treatment of the skin.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

798

Diseases of specific organ systems

CANINE EAR MARGIN DERMATOSIS

salicylic acid, and others) and moisturizers. Inflamed
lesions may benefit from hydrocortisone and/or antibiotic creams or ointments.

Definition/overview
Canine ear margin dermatosis is a common disorder of
keratinization seen in Dachshunds and other breeds with
pendulous ears.

Etiology

NASODIGITAL HYPERKERATOSIS
Definition/overview
This condition is associated with excessive amounts of
stratum corneum, confined to the planum nasale and
footpads.

A hereditary basis is suspected.

Pathophysiology
Follicular casts adhere to the skin and hairs of the medial
and lateral pinnal margins. With progression, head shaking, or scratching, the hard crusts can crack and fissure
the ear tissue.

Clinical presentation
Variable alopecia, scale, crust, and keratinous debris are
present at the pinnal margins (Figure 18.57). Pruritus is
not often a symptom.

Differential diagnosis

Etiology
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis results from an increased production, or retention, of keratinized tissue. Nasodigital
hyperkeratosis in the idiopathic form occurs most commonly in old dogs.

Pathophysiology
There is increased production, or retention, of keratinized
tissue as an idiopathic change or due to a variety of skin
disorders.

Clinical presentation

Hypothyroidism, scabies, vasculitis.

A superficial skin scraping can rule in scabies while
histopathology can confirm the diagnosis and rule out
vasculitis.

Nasal hyperkeratosis presents as a thickened, fissured
accumulation of dry, horny tissue confined to the planum
nasale (Figure 18.58). Pedal hyperkeratosis is more variable in its presentation, often extensively affecting the
cranial edges of the footpads.

Management

Differential diagnosis

Control may be achieved with regular lifelong use of
antiseborrheic shampoos (benzoyl peroxide, sulfur,

Pemphigus foliaceus, canine distemper virus or
Leishmania infection, zinc-responsive dermatosis, generic
dog food dermatosis, superficial necrolytic dermatitis
(necrolytic migratory erythema), cutaneous adverse drug

Diagnosis

18.57

18.58

Figure 18.57 Thickened, hyperkeratotic crusts and follicular
casts along the pinnal margins of a 2-year-old Cockapoo dog
with ear margin dermatosis. (Courtesy R. Calvert)

K22463_C018.indd 798

Figure 18.58 Hyperkeratosis of the nasal planum in a dog with
idiopathic nasodigital hyperkeratosis. (Case material UFVMC)

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

799

18.59

reaction, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), cutaneous
T-cell lymphoma, contact dermatitis, CLE, familial pad
hyperkeratosis, papillomavirus, hereditary nasal parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers.

Diagnosis
If the lesions occur in an old dog with no other skin or systemic problems, diagnosis can be made on clinical findings. If any other skin lesions are present or if the dog
is young to middle aged, other disorders must be considered and excluded. A skin biopsy can confirm idiopathic
nasodigital hyperkeratosis.

Management
Hydration and application of topical keratolytic agents
(propylene glycol, salicylic acid, sodium lactate, urea,
tretinoin) may improve the condition, but treatment
must be lifelong. Oral synthetic retinoids and zinc supplementation may be of some benefit.

FELINE ACNE
Definition/overview
Feline acne is characterized by the formation of comedones and other lesions on the chin and perioral area.

Etiology
Multiple factors that lead to a localized keratinization
defect of hair follicles and hyperplasia of the sebaceous
glands may result in feline acne, or the condition may be
idiopathic. Aggravating factors include poor grooming
habits, a seborrheic predisposition, stress, viral influences, and immunosuppression.

Figure 18.59 Papules, pustules, and comedones on the chin of
a cat with feline acne. (Courtesy S.R. Merchant)

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the presence of classic lesions on
the chin and lips. Demodex, Malassezia, secondary bacteria, dermatophytosis, other fungi, and the chin form of
eosinophilic granuloma may need to be ruled out.

Management
Treatment is lifelong and can include gentle topical application of antiseborrheic shampoos, metronidazole, clindamycin, mupirocin, vitamin A acid (isotretinoin), and
systemic antibiotics. Although mupirocin can be helpful,
nephrotoxicity can occur if topical mupirocin in a polyethylene glycol base is applied over large areas of the cat.

AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS

Pathophysiology

PEMPHIGUS FOLIACEUS

Feline acne occurs relatively frequently in the cat. It is
considered a disorder of keratinization that is commonly
complicated by secondary bacterial or yeast infection.

Definition/overview

Clinical presentation
Comedones on the chin, lower lip, or upper lip are early
lesions of feline acne (Figure 18.59). Folliculitis, furunculosis, or cellulitis may develop, as evidenced by papules,
pustules, bullae, and draining tracts.

Differential diagnosis
Contact dermatitis, folliculitis (Pasteurella, β-hemolytic
Streptococcus, Staphylococcus), Malassezia dermatitis,
eosinophilic granuloma, dermatophytosis, demodicosis,
trauma, AD, food hypersensitivity.

K22463_C018.indd 799

Pemphigus foliaceus is the most common autoimmune
skin disease in the dog and cat. It is characterized by loss
of keratinocyte cohesion.

Etiology
Antikeratinocyte membrane autoantibodies cause loss of
adhesion between keratinocytes (acantholysis), with subsequent intraepidermal pustule formation.

Pathophysiology
Pemphigus antibody binds to antigen on the keratinocyte
adhesion molecule, which hydrolyzes the adhesion molecule. Loss of intercellular cohesion results. Acantholysis

23/04/16 1:25 pm

800

Diseases of specific organ systems

and vesicle formation, followed quickly by neutrophil or
eosinophil influx, yields a pustule. Genetics, topical or
systemic medications, vaccines, neoplasia, and chronic
hypersensitivity disease have been implicated in the disease onset.

cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, superficial necrolytic dermatitis (necrolytic migratory erythema), dermatophilosis, pemphigus erythematosus, CLE, cutaneous adverse
drug reaction, and leishmaniasis should be considered,
depending on which clinical signs predominate.

Clinical presentation

Diagnosis

Akitas, Chow Chows, and Dachshunds are a few of the
breeds considered to be predisposed to this transiently
pustular disease that starts on the face, nasal planum,
and ears. The feet, clawbeds, footpads, and trunk can
be involved singly or together. Erosions and yellow or
­honey-colored crusts are more often evident as pustules
rupture easily (Figure 18.60). Scale, alopecia, erythema,
and epidermal collarettes can be seen as well.

History, physical examination, pustule cytology (see
Figure 18.27), skin biopsy, dermatophyte culture.
Staphylococcal folliculitis and dermatophytosis can mask
or mimic, respectively, the histopathologic changes of
pemphigus foliaceus. Many dermatologists recommend
appropriate treatment for staphylococcal infection prior
to biopsy to remove this potentially confusing component for the pathologist. Immunopathologic testing is not
necessary for a diagnosis.

Differential diagnosis
Staphylococcal folliculitis, dermatophytosis, demodicosis, zinc-responsive dermatosis, SLE, dermatomyositis,
18.60

Management
The extent of treatment depends on the severity of the
disease. Some patients may only require topical glucocorticoids, or tetracycline and niacinamide, but the majority require immunosuppressive doses of prednisolone,
dexamethasone, or triamcinolone and either alternate
day azathioprine (or mycophenolate mofetil) (dogs) or
chlorambucil (cats) (Table 18.6). Leflunomide has been
successful in otherwise difficult cases. Close monitoring
of the patient for side-effects of therapy is imperative.
Ten percent of patients do not respond to treatment.
Animals that survive 1 year often have a good prognosis. A response to treatment should be evident after
2 weeks of immunosuppressive therapy and maintenance
therapy is hopefully achieved in 4 months. Treatment is
lifelong.

CUTANEOUS (DISCOID) LUPUS
ERYTHEMATOSUS
Definition/overview
CLE is a benign variant of SLE, usually confined to
the face.

Etiology
CLE is the second most common autoimmune skin disease
of dogs. It is exacerbated by ultraviolet (UV) light.

Pathophysiology
Figure 18.60 Generalized crusted papules, pustules, and draining
tracts in a 2-year-old Great Dane with pemphigus foliaceus and
furunculosis due to Staphylococcus pseudointermedius.

K22463_C018.indd 800

UV light induces expression of nuclear and cytoplasmic antigens on keratinocytes. Antibodies are produced
to these antigens and deposited at the basement membrane. Epidermal basal cells become damaged, leading to subepidermal vesicle formation and immune

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

801

Table 18.6 Anti-inflammatory/immunosuppressive therapy for dermatologic disorders.

Species

Dose
(mg/kg)

Route

Interval
(hours)

C

0.125–1

PO

12–24

D

0.07–0.9

PO

24 or ÷ 12

C

2–6

PO

24

D

0.8–1.5

PO

12–24

C

1.2–6

PO

24

D

0.5–2

PO

24

B

0.05–0.6

PO

24–72

Azathioprine

D

1.5–2.5

PO

48

Chlorambucil

B

0.1–0.2

PO

24–48

Cyclosporine A
(microemulsified)

C

7

PO

24–48

D

5

PO

24–48

Dapsone

D

1

PO

8

Interferon alpha

C

30–300

PO/SC

24

D

20,000–1.5 MU/kg

PO/SC

24–72

Interferon gamma

D

5,000–10,000 U/kg

SC

3 times a week for
4 weeks; every 7 days
for 4 weeks

Interferon omega

C

1–1.5 MU/kg

SC

24–96

D

500 IU/15 kg

PO

24

Leflunomide

B

2–4

PO

24

Lomustine

B

50–90 mg/m2

PO

21–42 days

C

10 mg total

PO

21–42 days

Mycophenolate mofetil

D

7–14

PO

8

Niacinamide

D

250–500 total

PO

8

Oclacitinib

D

0.4–0.6

PO

12 × 14 days,
24 subsequent

Pentoxifylline

C

100 mg total

PO

12

D

10–30

PO

8–12

Piroxicam

D

0.3

PO

24–48

Tetracycline

D

250–500 total

PO

8

Generic
Corticosteroids
Dexamethasone

Methylprednisolone

Prednisolone

Triamcinolone
Others

D, dog; C, cat; B, dog and cat, PO, per os; SC, subcutaneous.

K22463_C018.indd 801

23/04/16 1:25 pm

802

Diseases of specific organ systems

complex deposition at the basement membrane zone
of the e­ pidermis. CLE may be related to exfoliative CLE
(formerly German Shorthaired Pointer lupoid derma­
tosis), vesicular CLE (formerly ulcerative dermatosis of
Shetland Sheepdogs), and symmetric lupoid onychitis.

Clinical presentation
Gray–white depigmented macules and loss of cobblestone appearance of nasal planum may be the earliest
signs. Generalized nasal planum depigmentation, secondary erosion, ulceration, and crusting may ensue
(Figure 18.61). The eyelids, lips, and ear pinnae may also
be affected and, rarely, footpads and genitalia. Collies,
German Shepherd Dogs, Shetland Sheepdogs, and their
crosses are predisposed.

Differential diagnosis
MCP, nasal pyoderma, pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus
erythematosus, dermatomyositis, uveodermatologic
syndrome, SLE, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, cutaneous
adverse drug reaction, vitiligo, contact irritant dermatitis, fungal infections.

Diagnosis
Histopathology of nonulcerated lesions after appropriate extended antibiotic treatment for MCP can aid in the
diagnosis, as these two disorders are similar histopathologically. An antinuclear antibody test should be negative,
although false-positive results are not uncommon from
nasal planum or footpad samples. Immunopathologic
testing is not necessary for a diagnosis.
18.61

Management
Extended oral antibiotic therapy for Staphylococcus spp.
infections is usually indicated initially (Table 18.3).
Depending on the severity of the CLE lesions, treatment can be successful with topical glucocorticoids or
topical tacrolimus, applying sunscreen, and avoiding
­
UV ­exposure, trial of oral tetracycline/niacinamide, and
supplementing with vitamin E and EFAs. In severely
ulcerated patients, systemic immunosuppression (prednisone, azathioprine) is indicated to reduce alar cartilage
destruction (Table 18.6).

METABOLIC DISORDERS
NECROLYTIC MIGRATORY ERYTHEMA/
SUPERFICIAL NECROLYTIC DERMATITIS/
METABOLIC EPIDERMAL NECROSIS/
HEPATOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME
Definition/overview
Necrolytic migratory erythema (NME) is a rare condition
in older dogs and cats associated with hepatocutaneous
syndrome (HCS) or glucagonoma syndrome (GS).

Etiology
Cirrhosis, infectious or drug-induced (e.g. phenobarbital)
hepatitis, hepatic or pancreatic neoplasia, or gastrointestinal disorders result in the clinical signs of NME.

Pathophysiology
While not completely understood in both HCS and GS,
lesions of NME are believed to be caused by the catabolic
and gluconeogenic effects of excessive glucagon and its
resulting hypoaminoacidemia. Many dogs have diabetes
mellitus subsequently. Hypoalbuminemia due to chronic
hepatic or other disease may result in zinc and EFA deficiencies as well and contribute to symptoms of NME.

Clinical presentation

Figure 18.61 Depigmentation and erosions of the nasal planum
and eyelid in an Australian Shepherd Dog with cutaneous lupus
erythematosus.

K22463_C018.indd 802

The age of onset is variable from 4–16 years old.
Hyperkeratotic footpads with or without fissuring or
ulceration are the most common cutaneous lesions.
Erythematous, ulcerative plaques on the distal limbs,
elbows, perioral, periocular, scrotal, prepuce, or peri­
vulvar areas may also occur frequently (Figure 18.62).
Secondary staphylococcal folliculitis and/or Malassezia
dermatitis can be present. Lameness, lethargy, anorexia,
and weight loss may be noted by owners. Polyuria and
polydipsia due to diabetes mellitus can be evident.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

18.62

803

18.63

Figure 18.62 Periocular, perioral, and pinnal crusting and
erosions in a 9-year-old Miniature Pinscher dog with necrolytic
migratory erythema due to infectious cholangiohepatitis.

Differential diagnosis
Pemphigus foliaceus, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, zinc
responsive dermatosis, toxic epidermal necrolysis, dermatophytosis, demodicosis, contact irritant dermatitis, and SLE should be considered. Additionally, in cats,
exfoliative dermatosis due to thymoma or FeLV- or FIVassociated disease must be suspected.

Diagnosis
A skin biopsy from a nonulcerated lesion will give the
diagnosis of NME. The underlying cause must be uncovered by a thorough diagnostic work up, which will
include a complete blood count, serum chemistry panel,
urinalysis, fasting and postprandial bile acids, abdominal
ultrasound, and liver biopsy or exploratory celiotomy for
pancreatic neoplasia. Amino acid and glucagon profiles
do not always correlate with disease severity and may
be abnormal in other diseases. Immunohistochemistry of
neoplastic tissue for glucagon, and other markers, can be
performed.

Management
The prognosis is poor unless a correctable underlying
disease is identified (Figure 18.63). Staphylococcal folliculitis and Malassezia dermatitis should be treated if present (caution with hepatic drug metabolism). Otherwise,
IV administration of amino acids is the most effective
treatment, although it usually only yields temporary
improvement. Symptoms may improve for 3 months
between treatments. A high-quality protein diet is recommended for nonencephalopathic dogs. Egg yolks (3–6 per
day), zinc, EFA, and oral amino acid supplementation can
be helpful. While prednisone can encourage zinc and EFA

K22463_C018.indd 803

Figure 18.63 Marked improvement in cutaneous lesions of the
dog in Figure 18.62 after treatment with amoxicillin/clavulanate
for E. coli cholangiohepatitis.

absorption, it must be considered only against the risks of
its use (diabetes, infections). Topical antimicrobial shampoo therapy is indicated and can provide some temporary
comfort. Appropriate medication for pain and lameness
due to footpad involvement can be helpful.

PSYCHOGENIC DERMATOSES
CANINE ACRAL LICK DERMATITIS
Definition/overview
Canine ALD manifests as continued or chronic licking of a
focal area on a distal extremity.

Etiology
The cause of most psychogenic dermatoses is unknown.
Underlying causes of ALD include hypersensitivities
(food, flea, AD), neurogenic, bacterial, Demodex, dermatophytosis, orthopedic conditions, and previous trauma.
In many cases there is no obvious underlying physical
cause and lesions may result from boredom, separation
anxiety, lack of environmental stimulation, and psychic
stressors (e.g. a change in the usual routine of a household member).

Pathophysiology
Canine ALD is an animal model of obsessive–­compulsive
disorder of humans. Constant licking over the ­anterior
carpus or metatarsus produces a thickened, firm, oval

23/04/16 1:25 pm

804

Diseases of specific organ systems

plaque with an erosive surface (Figure 18.64). Boredom
is often the major cause of this disease, but it is important to rule out other causes for the lesion and determine
whether infection preceded the licking or was superimposed on an underlying condition.

Differential diagnosis

Clinical presentation

Diagnosis

The most common manifestation is a well-circumscribed,
alopecic, erosive or ulcerative plaque that is peripherally
hyperpigmented and localized to the distal limb. It is
more common in large breed dogs. Several lesions may be
present. Local lymphadenopathy is not evident. Purulent
or serosanguineous fluid is not usually expressed by digital pressure.

Diagnosis is based on history and signalment, ­clinical
signs, skin scrapings, and dermatophyte culture.
Treatment should commence for staphylococcal folliculitis/furunculosis and hypersensitivities. Biopsy can be
performed for histopathology, aerobic culture and sensitivity considered (Table 18.7), and the involved limb
radiographed to rule out osteoarthritis.

Localized folliculitis/furunculosis, demodicosis, f­ungal,
mycobacterial, or oomycete granuloma, reaction to
referred pain from underlying osteoarthroses, cutaneous
neoplasia.

Management
18.64

After skin scraping and fungal culture of the lesion, most
dogs can be treated empirically for staphylococcal folliculitis/furunculosis. Because of chronic fibrotic changes
in the dermis, the infection should be treated for a minimum of 8–12 weeks. If a response does not occur within
2–4 weeks, however, aerobic culture and sensitivity must
be considered. The underlying cause must also be treated.
Behavior modification can be used as necessary and/or
an Elizabethan or similar collar or barrier. Additional
options include: topical antipruritics (flucinolone/
dimethyl sulfoxide, lidocaine gel followed by capsaicin);
intralesional corticosteroids; systemic narcotics or narcotic antagonists; anxiolytic agents; tricyclic antidepressants; progestogens; or acupuncture.
If treatment is unsuccessful, further diagnostics are in
order. However, in many of these cases a guarded prognosis is warranted.

FELINE PSYCHOGENIC ALOPECIA
Definition/overview
Feline psychogenic alopecia is an uncommon disorder that manifests as loss of hair on the limbs or trunk.
Psychodermatoses may affect both crossbred and pedigree cats.

Etiology
Any change in a cat’s environment may cause it to overgroom. Siamese cats may be overrepresented.

Pathophysiology
Figure 18.64 Well-demarcated alopecic and ulcerative plaques
on the forelimb of a Pit Bull Terrier with anesthesia of the
cutaneous branch of the radial nerve and acral lick dermatitis
9 months after being struck by a motor car. (Courtesy C.S. Foil)

K22463_C018.indd 804

Feline psychogenic alopecia, by itself, is an uncommon
cause of alopecia. More often, cats may transfer repetitive
licking and self-induced hair loss caused by a pruritic
stimulus such as a hypersensitivity into a psychogenic

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

805

Table 18.7 Canine acral lick dermatitis: biopsy or culture?
When to biopsy

When to culture

Unusual lesion appearance

No response to initial therapy

Unusual location

Rapid onset and progression of lesion

No response to therapy
Rapid onset and progression of lesion

component. In the cat, stressful stimuli are thought
to release a melanocyte-stimulating hormone, which
leads to increased grooming and endorphin production.
Endorphins may play an addictive role in this stereotypic
behavior of overgrooming.

18.65

Clinical presentation
Bilaterally symmetric alopecia or localized areas of alopecia (Figure 18.65) (especially on the medial forelimbs)
may be evident in cats with psychogenic alopecia.

Differential diagnosis
Flea bite or food hypersensitivity, demodicosis, AD, telogen defluxion secondary to internal disease, urinary tract
infection, ectoparasites.

Figure 18.65 Psychogenic alopecia on the limbs and trunk of a
Domestic Longhair cat. (Case material UFVMC)

Diagnosis
Psychogenic alopecia is overdiagnosed in cats. Diagnostic
investigation should include a comprehensive history
(environment [indoor cats more common], presence of
aggressive household companions, additions or deletions to the household), temperament of the patient (shy
or nervous cats predisposed), and exclusion of underlying pruritic disorders. A minimum database should
include superficial and deep skin scrapings, fecal floatation, fungal culture of hairs, acetate tape preparation
cytology, complete and thorough flea eradication, food
elimination diet(s), and identification of stress factors.
Further ectoparasite trial therapy (Cheyletiella, Otodectes,
D. gatoi) and a 30-day trial with an Elizabethan, or similar, collar to assess hair regrowth capability can be
considered.

Management
Treatment is aimed at modifying/removing stress factors,
decreasing the patient’s response to stress, referral to a
feline behaviorist, exercise, and owner education (mild
cases). Medical therapy may reduce the cat’s response to
stress. Tricyclic antidepressants, tranquilizers, and narcotic antagonists have been used with varying success.

K22463_C018.indd 805

A pruritic disease must always be considered and appropriately excluded.

MISCELLANEOUS DISORDERS
FELINE MILIARY DERMATITIS
Definition/overview
Feline miliary dermatitis is a cutaneous reaction pattern
of small crusted, millet-sized papules caused by numerous diseases.

Etiology
Feline miliary dermatitis is not a single disease but
rather a manifestation of various underlying diseases,
usually allergic, the most common of which is flea bite
hypersensitivity.

Pathophysiology
The lesion is a result of a focal influx of eosinophils, with
subsequent serum exudation. It is a cutaneous reaction to
many underlying diseases.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

806

Diseases of specific organ systems

18.66

of underlying hypersensitivities. All forms should be
­diagnosed and treated similarly.

Etiology
EGC is secondary to an underlying hypersensitivity condition (flea, mosquito, food, atopic dermatitis), which
may be complicated by staphylococcal or Malassezia
colonization.

Pathophysiology

Figure 18.66 Erythematous papules and scale on the trunk of
a cat with miliary dermatitis due to flea bite hypersensitivity.
(Case material UFVMC)

Uncontrolled recruitment of eosinophils is thought to
lead to the release of potent inflammatory agents. If
allowed to accumulate, these agents may initiate a local
inflammatory response and collagen necrosis.

feline eosinophilic plaque

Clinical presentation

Clinical presentation

Crusted papules (Figure 18.66) may be distributed around
the neck, focally, or generalized on the trunk.

Feline eosinophilic plaque is an intensely pruritic,
well-circumscribed, ulcerated or eroded plaque often
present in the inguinal, medial thigh, mucocutaneous
junctions, or ventral abdominal regions (Figure 18.67).
These lesions may be single or multiple and are associated with hypersensitivity conditions (especially flea bite
hypersensitivity).

Differential diagnosis
Underlying causes include flea bite hypersensitivity,
AD, food hypersensitivity, cutaneous adverse drug reaction, intestinal parasite hypersensitivity, Cheyletiella,
Otodectes, Notoedres, Demodex, lice, chiggers, Lynxacarus,
pemphigus foliaceus, staphylococcal folliculitis, dermatophytosis, and biotin or EFA deficiency.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on a comprehensive history, physical examination, ear cytology, superficial and deep skin
scrapings, fecal floatation, acetate tape preparation, complete and prolonged flea eradication, DTM culture, aerobic culture and response to antibiotics, histopathology
of lesions, novel protein elimination diet, and ruling out
infectious causes and hypersensitivities.

Management
Treatment is aimed at removing the primary cause.
Repositol methylprednisolone (20 mg/cat q3–6 months)
in patients without cardiac disease, prednisolone
(2.2 mg/kg PO on alternate days), amoxicillin–clavulanate,
or oral microemulsified cyclosporine A may give short-term
relief while the primary cause is resolving (Table 18.6).

FELINE EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA COMPLEX
Definition/overview
The eosinophilic granuloma complex (EGC) comprises
a group of cutaneous lesions in cats that are the result

K22463_C018.indd 806

Differential diagnosis
Cutaneous neoplasia (mast cell tumor, SCC, cutaneous
T-cell lymphoma), trauma, AD, food hypersensitivity, bacterial, mycobacterial, or fungal granulomas, cutaneous
viral disease.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made on clinical signs, histopathology
of the lesion to rule out neoplasia or viral disease,
and an exhaustive search for underlying hypersensitivity. Ectoparasites, dermatophytosis, staphylococcal ­
folliculitis, and Malassezia dermatitis should be
excluded.

Management
Treatment of the underlying hypersensitivity is imperative. Intense flea eradication for a minimum period
of 3 months is necessary (even in geographic regions
where fleas are not considered to be prevalent). Repositol
methylprednisolone acetate on two or three occasions
2 weeks apart, high doses of oral prednisolone, microemulsified cyclosporine A, or topical hydrocortisone
aceponate will usually allow resolution of the lesion
once the hypersensitivity is controlled. Leflunomide has
been effective in otherwise poorly responsive patients
(Table 18.6).

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

18.67

Figure 18.67 Multiple coalescing eosinophilic plaques in a
Domestic Shorthair cat. (Courtesy S.R. Merchant)

807

18.68

Figure 18.68 Multiple nodules on the tongue and hard and soft
palates of a Domestic Longhair cat with pharyngeal granuloma
and flea bite hypersensitivity.

feline eosinophilic granuloma

18.69

Definition/overview
A clinical and histopathologic syndrome of EGC of the cat.

Etiology
A hypersensitivity reaction is suspected to be responsible.

Pathophysiology
While the exact cause is unknown, collagen degeneration with variable granulomatous inflammation occurs.
Tissue collagen is considered to be an innocent bystander
and not the specific target. Tissue eosinophilia is present
in early lesions.

Clinical presentation
Feline eosinophilic
manifestations:

granuloma

has

three

clinical

●● The linear form is a firm, raised, linear lesion present
on the distal hindlimb or abdomen of young cats or
as ulceration with white foci of the footpads. Pruritus
may or may not be evident.
●● The pharyngeal form is a verrucous or smooth nodule present in the mouth or pharynx of older cats
(Figure 18.68). It is often associated with indolent ulcer.
Dysphagia or respiratory obstruction may be evident.
●● The chin form is manifest as chin edema, which may
wax and wane and be asymptomatic (Figure 18.69).

Differential diagnosis
Cutaneous neoplasia (mast cell tumor, SCC, cutaneous
T-cell lymphoma), staphylococcal folliculitis, bacterial or
fungal granuloma, demodicosis, trauma, feline cowpox

K22463_C018.indd 807

Figure 18.69 Edema of the chin in a cat with the chin form of
eosinophilic granuloma. (Case material UFVMC)

infection, AD, food hypersensitivity, plasma cell pododermatitis, sterile granuloma/pyogranuloma syndrome.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of any of these forms is based on clinical signs
and histopathology of the lesions. Ectoparasites, staphylococcal folliculitis, and dermatophytosis should be
excluded.

Management
Repositol methylprednisolone acetate or oral prednisolone, triamcinolone, or dexamethasone may aid resolution of the pharyngeal and chin forms (Table 18.6).
Intensive, lifelong flea eradication is necessary.
Underlying ­
hypersensitivity conditions must be diagnosed and controlled. Amoxicillin–clavulanate for 30 days
is useful (Table 18.3).

23/04/16 1:25 pm

808

Diseases of specific organ systems

feline indolent ulcer

Management

Definition/overview
Indolent lip ulcers are the most common of the dermatoses included in the EGC.

Etiology
A combined genetic and hypersensitivity predisposition
is suspected. A heritable form of feline indolent ulcer has
been described.

Pathophysiology

The underlying hypersensitivities should be controlled
with an intense flea eradication trial. Antibiotic therapy
(amoxicillin with clavulanic acid, potentiated sulfonamides) for 3–6 weeks will resolve lesions in some cats.
Repositol methylprednisolone acetate every 2 weeks for
three treatments is often necessary if cardiac disease is
not present. In resistant cases, progestagens, cryosurgery,
laser surgery, radiation therapy, interferon, or immune
stimulants may be helpful. Cats may ‘outgrow’ the disorder at 2–3 years of age. Leflunomide has been effective in
otherwise poorly responsive patients.

While the exact underlying cause is unknown, flea bite
hypersensitivity and a genetic predisposition are implicated. Spontaneous improvement has been reported, as
well as resolution, with complete flea eradication.

Definition/overview

Clinical presentation

Actinic dermatitis is induced by solar damage to lightly
or nonpigmented and sparsely haired skin.

Feline indolent ulcer is a unilateral or bilateral, well-­
circumscribed, dish-shaped ulcer located on the upper lip,
lower lip, and rarely on the skin (Figure 18.70). It may be
associated with pharyngeal eosinophilic granuloma.

ACTINIC DERMATITIS

Etiology
Actinic dermatitis is caused by chronic keratinocyte
exposure to UV light.

Differential diagnosis

Pathophysiology

Cutaneous neoplasia (SCC), trauma, feline cowpox, herpesvirus, calicivirus, FeLV infections, AD, food hypersensitivity, cryptococcosis.

Chronic exposure to UVA and UVB light leads to a progressive decrease in the number of Langerhans cells in the
epidermis and monoclonal malignant transformation of
keratinocytes. Solar irradiation may result in epidermal
dysplasia, carcinoma in situ, invasive SCC, or cutaneous
hemangioma and hemangiosarcoma.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made on histopathology of the lesion to
rule out SCC and a search for underlying hypersensitivities. Ectoparasites and dermatophytosis should also
be excluded. Acetate tape preparations for bacteria and
yeast can be helpful.

Clinical presentation
The earliest clinical sign is erythema of the exposed
area. Subsequently, hyperkeratosis, crust, induration,
and plaques may develop on the pinnae (Figure 18.71),

18.70
18.71

Figure 18.70 Extensive ulceration of the upper lip in a
Domestic Longhair cat with an indolent ulcer due to flea bite
hypersensitivity. (Case material UFVMC)

K22463_C018.indd 808

Figure 18.71 Erythema, alopecia, and crusts in a white Domestic
Shorthair cat with feline solar dermatitis and actinic keratoses.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

eyelids, or nose of white or lightly pigmented cats, and
on the nose and abdomen (Figure 18.72) of lightly pigmented dogs. Dogs may develop actinic comedones and
erythematous nodules, which may become secondarily
infected and rupture. Invasive SCCs may develop from
these premalignant actinic keratoses. With chronic solar
damage, cutaneous hemangioma or hemangiosarcoma
may occur.

Differential diagnosis

809

10–15 minutes before sun exposure. Because tattoo ink is
deposited in the dermis, it is not photoprotective for keratinocytes. Staphylococcal folliculitis/furunculosis must
be completely treated.

CANINE JUVENILE CELLULITIS/JUVENILE
STERILE GRANULOMATOUS DERMATITIS AND
LYMPHADENITIS (PUPPY STRANGLES)

Dermatomyositis, uveodermatologic syndrome, cutaneous adverse drug reaction, cutaneous neoplasia, demodicosis, dermatophytosis, CLE, staphylococcal folliculitis/
furunculosis, pemphigus foliaceus or erythematosus, sterile granuloma/pyogranuloma syndrome.

Definition/overview

Diagnosis

The cause is unknown. There is, however, the possibility
of both an immunologic abnormality and a hereditary
component.

Diagnosis is made on a history of sun exposure, the color
of the affected skin of the cat or dog, and histopathology
of infection-free, nonulcerated skin lesions.

Management
Affected animals must be protected (avoidance, sunscreens, UV protective body suits) from the UV radiation
of the sun (including window exposure) between 9 am
and 4 pm daily to slow the progression of premalignant
actinic dermatitis and actinic keratoses. Surgical amputation of the pinnae prevents development of SCC in that
area. CO2 laser ablation and radiation therapy have been
successful. Topical imiquimod is helpful in small superficial lesions. Other treatments that have varying success include cryosurgery, topical 5-fluorouracil (toxic to
cats), oral acitretin, oral firocoxib (dogs), and hyperthermia of lesions. Waterproof, high-SPF, non-zinc sunscreen
that protects against UVA and UVB should be applied

Canine juvenile cellulitis is a granulomatous condition
that primarily affects the submandibular lymph nodes
and the skin of the pinnae and face.

Etiology

Pathophysiology
An underlying immune dysfunction is suspected as
the cause of the condition. There is an increased occurrence in certain breeds of dogs (Dachshunds and Golden
Retrievers).

Clinical presentation
Young dogs usually 3–16 weeks of age are affected.
Edema and/or pustules can be present on the face, lips,
pinnae (Figure 18.73), eyelids, prepuce, or anus. Crusts
and draining tracts also occur. Lymphadenopathy, fever,
depression, and joint pain are often noted. Entire litters
or an adult dog may be affected.
18.73

18.72

Figure 18.72 Erythematous plaques on the ventral abdomen of
an 8-year-old Bull Terrier with solar dermatitis.

K22463_C018.indd 809

Figure 18.73 Hyperplasia, edema, and pustules of the aural
canal and pinna, periocular and perioral alopecia, erosions, and
crusts in a 3-month-old silver Labrador Retriever with juvenile
cellulitis. (Case material UFVMC)

23/04/16 1:25 pm

810

Diseases of specific organ systems

Differential diagnosis

Clinical presentation

Demodicosis, staphylococcal folliculitis/furunculosis,
sterile granuloma/pyogranuloma syndrome, angioedema
due to a reaction to an insect bite or vaccine, pemphigus
foliaceus, cutaneous adverse drug reaction, dermatophytosis, causes of otitis externa.

Otitis media has been found to be present in 80–85% of
dogs with chronic otitis externa. Erythema, hyperpigmentation, and lichenification may be present on the pinna
and external ear canal to varying degrees. Pain, pruritus,
odor, and exudate are often evident (Figure 18.75). Ear
canal cartilage may not be pliable on palpation.

Diagnosis
A deep skin scraping must be performed to rule out
demodicosis as the etiology. Once demodicosis has been
excluded, most cases can be diagnosed on clinical signs
and age of onset. Cytology (pyogranulomatous inflammation with no microorganisms) and histopathology of
lesions will also assist in the diagnosis.

Management
Immunosuppressive doses of oral corticosteroids, followed by a slow taper, will often resolve lesions, but in
some patients lesions can recur when corticosteroids are
discontinued or the dosage is reduced. Evidence of secondary bacterial infection justifies the use of appropriate
antibiotics.

Differential diagnosis
Foreign bodies, Otodectes cynotis, bacterial and/or yeast
infections, defects in keratinization, autoimmune diseases, food hypersensitivity, AD, hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, juvenile cellulitis.

18.74

OTITIS EXTERNA
Definition/overview
Otitis externa is an inflammation of the epithelial lining
of the external ear canal.

Etiology
Otitis externa can result from numerous causes.
Predisposing factors increase the risk of otitis externa
and assist primary or perpetuating factors to cause disease. Primary factors directly cause otitis externa. The
most common primary factors are hypersensitivities,
keratinization disorders, and Otodectes infestation.
Primary factors must be controlled to aid in resolution of
otitis externa.
Perpetuating factors prevent resolution of otitis
externa and may be the major reason for poor response
to treatment or recurrence regardless of the predisposing
or primary causes.

Figure 18.74 Severe aural canal hyperproliferation with
aural cartilage calcification in an 8-year-old Cocker Spaniel
with end-stage otitis externa and otitis media due to food
hypersensitivity.

18.75

Pathophysiology
Initially, the ear canal becomes swollen and erythematous. Sebaceous gland hyperplasia and apocrine gland
dilatation develop, causing excessive cerumen production with altered composition. Continued inflammation
can lead to permanent changes such as ear canal cartilage calcification (Figure 18.74), fibrosis, and occlusion of
the ear canal.

K22463_C018.indd 810

Figure 18.75 Aural ulcers of the vertical canal and pinna due to
Malassezia pachydermatis in a 4-year-old Golden Retriever with
atopic dermatitis.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

Diagnosis
A thorough search for underlying causes is warranted.
Ear cytology is useful for selecting topical medications in
early cases. Normal radiographs of the tympanic b
­ ullae
do not rule out otitis media. CT (fine bony detail) or MRI
(soft tissue detail) yield better results for imaging the ear.
Otoscopic examination may enhance the suspicion of otitis media if an abnormal tympanic membrane, or no tympanic membrane, is visualized. Pain on palpation of the
bullae, recurrent otitis externa, or evidence of ­neurologic
abnormalities may further one’s suspicions of otitis media.

Management
Treatment of otitis externa and otitis media is aimed
at removing exudate, using topical antimicrobials and
­systemic antimicrobials (if otitis externa is severe and
in all cases of otitis media) based on cytology and/or culture and sensitivity from the appropriate areas of the ear
canal for an appropriate length of time (6–8 weeks for otitis media). Surgery (usually total ear canal a
­ blation with
lateral bulla osteotomy) is indicated to alleviate stenosis
of the ear canal, remove tumors or polyps, and to manage
medically resistant otitis media such as that associated
with mineralized ear canals. Surgery does not replace a
thorough search for predisposing and primary factors. If
these factors are not identified and controlled, treatment
will be a failure and recurrence must be expected.

SEBACEOUS ADENITIS
Definition/overview
Sebaceous adenitis is an uncommon idiopathic scaling
and alopecic dermatosis of dogs and cats caused by sebaceous gland destruction.

Etiology
An autosomal recessive mode of inheritance is suspected
for the Standard Poodle and Akita, although the exact etiology is uncertain.

811

hyperkeratosis, and silvery scale on the dorsal
muzzle, head, ears, neck, and thorax predominate.
Secondary staphylococcal folliculitis and furunculosis may be evident. Otitis externa is common.
●● In shortcoated breeds such as Vizslas, nodules and alopecic, annular, scaling plaques develop (Figure 18.76).
In both syndromes pruritus is not usually a complaint
unless staphylococcal folliculitis is present. Any breed of
dog can be affected with sebaceous adenitis.

Differential diagnosis
Primary seborrhea, ichthyosis, vitamin A responsive
dermatosis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis, staphylococcal folliculitis/furunculosis, hypothyroidism, follicular
dysplasia.

Diagnosis
Multiple skin specimens from scaly areas without alopecia are best to document active sebaceous gland inflammation on histopathology.

Management
Response to treatment varies with the breed of animal
and severity of disease. Control may be achieved in mild
cases with keratolytic shampoos and emollient rinses.
Daily application of 75% propylene glycol in water until
improvement is seen may be effective, although labor
intensive. Poodles have improved with daily then weekly
mineral bath oil soaks followed by shampooing. Oral cyclosporine A, vitamin A, isotretinoin, or acitretin are more
often used. A response may be seen after 4–8 weeks of
therapy. Affected animals should not be used for breeding.

18.76

Pathophysiology
A heritable inflammatory destruction of sebaceous glands
results in the absence of sebum and subsequent scaling
and follicular plugging. Young adult to middle aged dogs
are affected.

Clinical presentation
Two syndromes exist:

●● In longhaired breeds (Standard Poodles, Samoyeds,
and Akitas), bilaterally symmetrical follicular casts,

K22463_C018.indd 811

Figure 18.76 Irregular, patchy alopecia with variable erythema
on the head and pinna of a 3-year-old Vizsla with sebaceous
adenitis. (Case material UFVMC)

23/04/16 1:25 pm

812

Diseases of specific organ systems

OVERVIEW OF SELECTED SKIN TUMORS

Diagnosis
Histopathology of nonulcerated lesions containing
­epidermis is usually diagnostic (Table 18.8).

CUTANEOUS T-CELL (EPITHELIOTROPIC)
LYMPHOMA

Management

Definition/overview
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma is a cutaneous neoplasia characterized by the presence of epitheliotropic
T lymphocytes.

Etiology
Clones of CD8+ T lymphocytes infiltrate the epithelium
of the epidermis, hair follicles, apocrine glands, and oral
mucosa.

Pathophysiology

Excision of solitary lesions may be curative.
Chemotherapeutic protocols with lomustine or leflunomide may prolong survival. Responses have been observed
in a few patients who have failed lomustine therapy using
oral cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and
prednisone. In general, the prognosis is extremely poor
as most patients are diagnosed late in the disease process.
Early diagnosis and treatment may yield better results.

HISTIOCYTOMA

Malignant transformation of one or several clones of epitheliotropic T lymphocytes occurs, with subsequent infiltration into the epidermis, dermis, and oral mucosa.

Definition/overview

Clinical presentation

Etiology

Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma generally occurs in older
dogs and, occasionally, in cats. Depigmentation of the
nasal planum, muzzle, lips, and eyelids may be noted
(Figure 18.77). Gingivitis may be the earliest sign.
Excessive scale, erythema, ulcerations, and nodules occur
later in the disease.

It is a common, benign neoplasm of young dogs and,
rarely, of cats, with an unknown cause. Histiocytoma may
be a reactive hyperplasia rather than a true neoplasm.

Differential diagnosis
Dermatophytosis, keratinization disorders, dental disease, staphylococcal folliculitis, cheyletiellosis, regressing
histiocytoma.

Histiocytoma is a tumor originating from a CD34+ progenitor cell of the Langerhans or dendritic cell system.

Clinical presentation
Usually solitary nodules on the head, pinnae, or extremities. May be multiple in some patients and may involve
draining lymph nodes or spread internally in rare
cases. Histiocytomas are usually small, firm, button- or
­dome-shaped (Figure 18.78), well-circumscribed, and
occasionally ulcerated.

Differential diagnosis
18.77

Cutaneous reactive histiocytosis, any cutaneous neoplasm, dermatophytic kerion.
18.78

Figure 18.77 Depigmentation of the eyelids, nasal planum, and
lips, as well as loss of cobblestone architecture of nasal planum
and oral erosions, in a 9-year-old Spitz with cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma.

K22463_C018.indd 812

Figure 18.78 Alopecic, slightly erosive, raised, flat (buttonshaped) nodule of histiocytoma in a Labrador Retriever.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

813

Table 18.8 Common neoplastic and non-neoplastic skin tumors of the dog and cat.
Tumor

Characteristic lesion

Location

Diagnosis

Treatment

Squamous cell
carcinoma

Erosion, ulceration,
plaque

Ear, nose, trunk,
clawbed

Histopathology

Sx, C, R, I

Mast cell tumor

Nodule

Any

Histopathology,
cytology

Sx, R, C, CCS, H1, H2,
H, D

Sebaceous adenoma

Nodule (wart-like)

Trunk, head

Histopathology

Sx, vitamin A

Cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma

Depigmentation,
erosion, ulceration,
plaque, nodule,
gingivitis

Oral cavity, trunk

Histopathology

CCS, Le, Lo, CHOP, Sx, R

Histiocytoma

Nodule

Foot, face, trunk

Histopathology,
cytology

None

Fibropruritic nodule

Nodule

Rump

Histopathology

Flea eradication

Perianal gland
adenoma

Nodule

Perianal region

Histopathology,
cytology

Sx, neuter

Sx, surgical excision; C, cryosurgery; R, radiation; CCS, corticosteroids; H1, H1 blocker; H2, H2 blocker; H, hyperthermia; D, deionized
water; I, imiquimod; Le, leflunomide; Lo, lomustine; CHOP, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone.

Diagnosis
The age of the patient (young) and the location (head
or distal extremities) and appearance of the nodule
(button-like) usually give a high index of suspicion.
Subsequent regression or histologic examination confirms the diagnosis (Table 18.8). Intraepithelial tumor
cells may be noted on histology and confused with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. The presence of lymphocytes
within the nodule signals regression.

Management
Most of these tumors regress on their own in 2–8 weeks.
Surgical excision is usually curative. Immunosuppression
is contraindicated.

MAST CELL TUMOR
Definition/overview

Palpation of lesions may result in release of amines and
local edema, inflammation, and flushing.

Clinical presentation
While MCTs are more common in older dogs, they can
occur at any age. Predisposed breeds include Boxers,
Boston Terriers, English Bulldogs, Labrador Retrievers,
and Shar Peis. MCTs are usually solitary, but they may
be multicentric. The trunk, extremities (Figure 18.79),
then the head are predilection sites for dogs. Multiple
histiocytic MCTs have been described in Siamese kittens
and cutaneous mastocytosis has occurred in puppies. In
cats (Figure 18.80), lesions more often occur on the head
and neck in older cats, with males and Siamese cats predisposed. Tumors may be soft or firm, large or small,
plaque or nodule, generally alopecic or occasionally
­pin-feathered (see Figure 18.6).

Mast cell tumors (MCTs) are common cutaneous neoplasms in dogs and cats that originate from dermal mast
cells.

Differential diagnosis

Etiology/pathophysiology

Diagnosis

The etiology of mast cell neoplasia is unknown, although
experimental transmission has been successful in dogs.
Mast cells may release numerous vasoactive amines, most
notably histamine and heparin, which elicit paraneoplastic effects of gastric ulceration and coagulopathies.

Impression smears or aspirates may give a tentative
diagnosis. Anaplastic and histiocytic mast cells may not
contain distinctive granules and histologic examination
would be necessary (Table 18.8). MCTs may be confused
with other round cell tumors or eosinophilic plaques.

K22463_C018.indd 813

Histiocytoma, lipoma, SCC, fungal or bacterial granuloma,
other cutaneous neoplasm.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

814

Diseases of specific organ systems

18.79

Figure 18.79 Ulcerative, alopecic nodule on the carpus of a
9-year-old Labrador Retriever with a mast cell tumor. (Case
material UFVMC)
18.80

malignant. Mast cells may be found in lymph node and
bone marrow aspirates and buffy coat smears from
normal dogs and dogs with hypersensitivities or ectoparasites. Histopathology of draining lymph nodes is
recommended.
H1 and H2 blockers and prednisone are recommended
to counteract the effects of histamine and other vasoactive amines. Glucocorticoid drugs may reduce swelling
preoperatively, so wide (at least 2 cm margins and one
fascial plane) surgical excision might be more readily
achieved. Further therapy using lomustine, prednisone,
and vinblastine is predicated on presence of metastasis.

PAPILLOMATOSIS
(see also Chapter 21: Infectious diseases, Dogs)

Definition/overview
Papillomas are common cutaneous epidermal neoplasms
(warts) caused by papillomaviruses.

Etiology
At least 15 types of papillomaviruses have been identified
in dogs; these are site and tissue specific. The viruses are
environmentally stable for up to 2 months. Viral proteins
interfere with control of cell proliferation, thus inducing
cell growth.

Pathophysiology
Figure 18.80 Erythematous papules and nodules on the pinna
of a 1-year-old Siamese cat due to a mast cell tumor.

Special stains may be employed to stain the metachromatic granules, although less ­
well-differentiated
tumors require histochemical markers for diagnosis.
Determination of local and systemic involvement should
then be done (regional lymph nodes, spleen, liver, mesenteric lymph nodes, other cutaneous sites, bone marrow).

Management
A combination of wide surgical excision, cryosurgery,
chemotherapy, external beam megavoltage radiotherapy,
or immunotherapy is employed, as well as oral histamine
blocking agents. Metastasis to regional lymph nodes,
spleen, liver, and bone marrow occurs in 50% of dogs.
Tumors arising from the perineum or genitalia, digits,
and mucocutaneous sites are more commonly aggressive.
Well-differentiated MCTs often have a better prognosis, but all tumors should be considered potentially

K22463_C018.indd 814

Papillomaviruses are transmitted by direct contact and
fomites to damaged skin. Papillomaviruses may also
be responsible for certain types of SCC in dogs and cats.
Glucocorticoids and immunosuppression cause recrudescence of latent infections. Solitary papillomas of cats may
not be caused by papillomaviruses, although two types of
papillomaviruses do occur in cats.

Clinical presentation
Five syndromes exist in dogs:

●● Canine oral papillomatosis affects the oral cavity, face,
and eyes of young dogs, with papules that progress to
fronding hyperkeratotic nodules (Figure 18.81).
●● Cutaneous papillomas affect the head, eyelids, and
feet of older Cocker Spaniels and Kerry Blue Terriers.
They are pedunculated, fronded, alopecic masses
(<0.5 cm).
●● Cutaneous inverted papillomas occur on the ventral abdomen and groin of young adult dogs
(Figure 18.82). These firm, raised nodules have a central pore opening to the skin.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

18.81

815

Differential diagnosis
Dogs: infundibular keratinizing acanthoma, cutaneous
horn, lentigo, melanoma, sebaceous gland adenoma. Cats:
cutaneous horn, melanoma, dilated pore (of Winer), mast
cell tumor.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis may be made on history and clinical appearance and confirmed on histology of the lesion. Cutaneous
horns may overlie papillomas. Sebaceous adenoma and
sebaceous hyperplasia are commonly clinically misdiagnosed as papillomas.

Management

Figure 18.81 Multiple, exophytic, verrucous nodules in
a 4-month-old Llewelyn Setter with oral and cutaneous
papillomatosis. (Case material UFVMC)
18.82

Cellular immunity is responsible for papilloma regression. Vaccines may be effective in prevention, but they
have no therapeutic benefit. SCCs can arise at injection
sites. Regression often occurs in 3–5 months and correlates with a strong antibody response. Cryo- or electrosurgery, or CO2 laser ablation may give relief from large,
foul-smelling lesions that interfere with mastication.

SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA
Definition/overview
SCCs are common malignant neoplasms of keratinocytes
in dogs and cats.

Etiology/pathophysiology
Figure 18.82 Multiple, variably hyperpigmented, hyperkeratotic
nodules on the trunk of a Poodle with endophytic squamous
papillomas. (Case material UFVMC)

●● Multiple pigmented, papular, cutaneous papillomas
were reported from the ventrum of an adult Boxer
receiving glucocorticoids long term. Regression
occurred after the glucocorticoids were discontinued.
●● Multiple pigmented plaques have occurred in
Miniature Schnauzers and Pugs as an autosomal
dominant pattern (pigmented epidermal nevi).
Lesions consisted of melanotic macules and plaques.
These are precursors to Bowen’s disease (multicentric
SCC in situ).
Multiple viral papillomas occur in cats on the head, neck,
dorsal thorax, ventral abdomen, and proximal limbs.
They begin as melanotic macules, then plaques, which
become scaly and seborrheic. Oral lesions on the dorsal
tongue may occur in 6–9-month-old kittens. These are
pink, soft plaques.

K22463_C018.indd 815

Although not clear, the etiology of SCC may be solar induction or, rarely, associated with previous severe damage to
the epidermis in the form of thermal injury, frostbite, or
chronic infections. Multicentric SCCs in situ (Bowen’s disease) of cats may contain papillomavirus antigen.

Clinical presentation
In dogs, proliferative or ulcerative lesions occur on the
trunk, digits, and face. Cutaneous horns may develop on
ulcerative lesions. Dogs that sunbathe may have multiple lesions on the ventral trunk. Dogs with white, short
hair coats on the ventrum have the highest incidence
of solar-induced SCC. Subungual SCC (clawbed) usually
affects a single digit and causes pain, swelling, exudate,
and loss of, or misshapen, claw. Subungual SCC more often
affects black-coated breeds of dogs.
In cats, actinic damage accounts for the majority of
tumors, as white cats are at increased risk of SCC. Common
sites for the ulcerative or erosive lesions include the
external nares, pinnae, eyelids, and lips (Figure 18.83).
Multicentric SCCs in situ are not actinic and
are seen in older cats and dogs. Lesions occur in darkly

23/04/16 1:25 pm

816

Diseases of specific organ systems

18.83

Figure 18.83 Erosions and ulcerations of the eyelids and nares
with patchy alopecia of the nasal bridge of a white Domestic
Shorthair cat with squamous cell carcinoma.

pigmented skin. Melanotic, hyperkeratotic macules and
plaques may be verrucous.

Differential diagnosis

18.84

Figure 18.84 Punctate ulcers and draining tracts in the
abdominal and inguinal regions of a cat with panniculitis due to
opportunistic mycobacteriosis (M. fortuitum).

Diagnosis
Biopsy and mycobacterial tissue culture (including panniculus), mycobacterial speciation, and sensitivity.

Various neoplastic, infectious, granulomatous disorders.

STERILE NODULAR PANNICULITIS

Diagnosis

Characteristic lesion

While cytology may yield a presumptive diagnosis,
definitive diagnosis can be made on histopathology
(Table 18.8). Clawbed or lip lesions may be mistaken for
paronychia or indolent ulcer, respectively.

Nodule, draining tract, or ulcer in area of panniculus
(Figure 18.85).

Management
SCCs are generally locally invasive and slow to metastasize. However, subungual SCCs are more aggressive and
22% metastasize to regional lymph nodes. Early diagnosis and aggressive surgical amputation are imperative.
Pinnectomy and nosectomy, cryosurgery, noninvasive
brachytherapy, hyperthermia, photodynamic therapy,
and laser therapy are viable options for SCC.
Multicentric SCCs in situ in cats usually respond to CO2
laser therapy or topical 5% imiquimod cream. Synthetic
oral retinoids have yielded variable responses. Piroxicam
and firocoxib have also been used.

SELECTED DERMATOSES OF DOGS
AND CATS
RAPIDLY GROWING (OPPORTUNISTIC OR
ATYPICAL) MYCOBACTERIA

Location
Trunk.

Diagnosis
Biopsy, aerobic, anaerobic, mycobacterial, fungal tissue
cultures (include panniculus).

CALCINOSIS CUTIS
Characteristic lesion
Erythematous plaque (Figure 18.86) or coalescing (white)
papules with pruritus.

Location
Inguinal, dorsal neck, axillae.

Diagnosis
Biopsy, history of cortisone use.

FELINE IDIOPATHIC ULCERATIVE DERMATOSIS

Characteristic lesion

Characteristic lesion

Nodule(s), purpuric macules, draining tract (Figure 18.84).

Ulcer (Figure 18.87).

Location

Location

Inguinal, lumbar.

Dorsal neck and shoulders.

K22463_C018.indd 816

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

18.85

817

Diagnosis
Biopsy; rule out food hypersensitivity, injection reaction,
SCC, panniculitis, contact irritant, burn.

PLASMA CELL PODODERMATITIS
Characteristic lesion
Swelling, deflation, erosion, or ulceration (Figure 18.88).

Location
Footpads.
Figure 18.85 Purpuric nodules and ulceration in a 1-year-old
Pomeranian with sterile nodular panniculitis. (Courtesy
S.R. Merchant)

Diagnosis
Biopsy.

DERMATOMYOSITIS/ISCHEMIC DERMATOPATHY
18.86

Characteristic lesion
Scarring alopecia (Figure 18.89).

Location
Pressure points, ear tips, tail tip, bridge of nose.

Diagnosis
Biopsy (skin and muscle), electromyography.

POST-RABIES VACCINE PANNICULITIS
Characteristic lesion
Figure 18.86 Erythematous, firm plaque of calcinosis cutis
in a 10-year-old female spayed Boston Terrier with iatrogenic
hyperadrenocorticism. (Case material UFVMC)

18.87

Alopecia, hyperpigmentation (Figure 18.90).

Location
Site of prior subcutaneous rabies vaccine.

Diagnosis
Biopsy; include panniculus.

CUTANEOUS ADVERSE DRUG REACTION
Characteristic lesion
Any lesion type, erythematous plaque, macule, papule,
pustule, erosion, ulceration, urticaria, angioedema, vasculitis, lichenoid. (Figure 18.91).

Location
Inguinal, dorsal neck, face, any location.

Diagnosis
Figure 18.87 Ulcers on the dorsal neck of a cat with feline
idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis.

K22463_C018.indd 817

Biopsy, history of any type of medication use (including
nutraceuticals and/or herbal products).

23/04/16 1:25 pm

818

Diseases of specific organ systems

18.88

18.90

Figure 18.90 Patch of alopecia and hyperpigmentation in an
8-month-old Terrier mix with post-rabies vaccine panniculitis.

18.91

Figure 18.88 Ulcer and deflation of the metacarpal footpad in
a cat with plasma cell pododermatitis.

18.89

Figure 18.89 Symmetrical scarring alopecia, scale, and
hyperpigmentation in a Chow Chow with dermatomyositis.

K22463_C018.indd 818

Figure 18.91 Erythematous macules in a 4-year-old female
Shih Tzu with a cutaneous drug reaction to cephalexin.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Dermatologic disorders

819

VASCULITIS

LUPOID ONYCHITIS

Characteristic lesion

Characteristic lesion

Ulceration (Figure 18.92).

Onychomadesis, onychorrhexis, erythematous, alopecic,
ulcerative dermatitis (Figure 18.93).

Location

Location

Pinnae, footpads, philtrum, tail, claws, elbow, lips

Claws and surrounding skin.

Diagnosis
Biopsy, history, breed, diascopy, body region, dermatologic examination, search for underlying causes (drugs,
vaccines, food, insect, vector-borne, lupus, idiopathic).
18.92

Figure 18.92 Chronic lesions in a dog with pinnal vasculitis:
ear tip necrosis, circular to linear scarring, alopecia, and
hyperpigmentation. (Case material UFVMC)
18.93

Diagnosis
Cytology of clawbeds, aerobic culture and sensitivity, fungal culture of claw or tissue, biopsy of claw, food elimination diets.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Gold RM, Patterson AP, Lawhon SD (2013) Understanding
methicillin resistance in staphylococci isolated from dogs
with pyoderma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 243:817–824.
Greene CE (2012) Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 4th edn.
Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.
Gross TL, Ihrke PH, Walder EJ et al. (2005) (eds.) Skin Diseases of
the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathological Diagnosis, 2nd
edn. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Jackson H, Marsella R (2012) BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline
Dermatology, 3rd edn. British Small Animal Veterinary
Association, Gloucester.
Koch SN, Torres SMF, Plumb DC (2012) Canine and Feline
Dermatology Drug Handbook. Wiley-Blackwell, Ames.
Marsella R, Sousa CA, Gonzales AJ et al. (2012) Current
understanding of the pathophysiologic mechanisms of
canine atopic dermatitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 241:194–207.
Miller WH, Griffin CE, Campbell KL (2013) Muller & Kirk’s Small
Animal Dermatology, 7th edn. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.
Mueller RS, Bensignor E, Ferrer L et al. (2012) Treatment of
demodicosis in dogs: 2011 Clinical Practice Guidelines. Vet
Dermatol 23:86–96.

Figure 18.93 Onychodystrophy and onychomadesis of
multiple claws with erythematous, alopecic, ulcerative
pododermatitis in a mixed-breed dog with symmetric lupoid
onychitis.

K22463_C018.indd 819

23/04/16 1:25 pm

This page intentionally left blank

821

Chapter 19
Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases
Dennis E. Brooks & Megan L. Sullivan
INTRODUCTION
Ophthalmic examination of animals with systemic disease is an important diagnostic method of categorizing
and differentiating systemic disease processes. Infectious,
neoplastic, autoimmune, nutritional, toxic, and metabolic
diseases may all have early and prominent ocular manifestations. Visual status may also be important to owners
attempting to decide how aggressively they wish to pursue diagnostic and therapeutic options in the treatment
of systemic diseases.

BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
(See also Chapter 21: Infectious diseases.)

BACTEREMIA
Definition/overview
Bacteremia due to Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp.,
Escherichia coli, and other bacteria can cause anterior or
posterior uveitis, endophthalmitis, chorioretinitis, and
optic neuritis. The ocular disease occurs from inflammation of the tissue from seeding of the iris, ciliary body,
or choroid with bacteria. Bacterial embolization occurs
in pyometra, prostatitis, pancreatitis, bacterial endocarditis, periodontal disease, and salmonellosis, or as an
immune-mediated phenomenon associated with circulating antigen–antibody complexes (chronic inflammatory
disease processes). Bacterial meningitis can be associated
with ocular signs.

LEPTOSPIROSIS
Definition/overview
Dogs with leptospirosis may have conjunctival hemorrhages, icterus, and hyphema and signs of anterior uveitis
due to an immunologic reaction and/or direct infection
of the uvea. Leptospirosis causes mild or inapparent ophthalmic signs in cats. It is considered a zoonotic ­disease.

K22463_C019.indd 821

The p
­ enicillin class of drugs and doxycycline effectively
treat this condition.

BRUCELLOSIS
Definition/overview
Brucella canis in dogs causes ophthalmic signs of recurrent corneal edema, anterior uveitis, chorioretinitis, optic
neuritis, endophthalmitis, and secondary glaucoma. The
organism can be cultured from aqueous and vitreous,
and titers detected in serum and aqueous humor. It is a
zoonotic disease diagnosed by bacteriologic culturing.
Systemic therapy with oral tetracycline and intramuscular streptomycin is recommended, although relapses can
occur.

LYME DISEASE
Definition/overview
Borreliosis (Lyme disease), caused by the spirochete
Borrelia burgdorferi, is transmitted by the tick Ixodes dammini. It is associated with orbital disease, conjunctivitis,
corneal edema, anterior uveitis, retinal petechiae, chorioretinitis, and retinal detachment (RD) in dogs. Systemic
doxycycline is the antibiotic of choice for borreliosis.

CLOSTRIDIAL DISEASE
Definition/overview
Clostridium botulinum type C in dogs, due to ingestion of
the bacterium in contaminated food, causes systemic muscular weakness and mydriasis. Clostridium tetani infects
skin wounds and releases a potent neurotoxin, which is
associated with nictitans protrusion in dogs and cats,
and a unique smiling/sneering appearance in cats due to
spasm of the facial musculature. Dogs and cats are not as
easily infected as other species such as horses, humans,
and sheep, but they certainly can become infected with
tetanus.

26/04/16 1:01 am

822

Diseases of specific organ systems

BARTONELLOSIS
Definition/overview
Bartonella henselae is the causative agent for human
‘cat scratch disease’. Bartonella vinsonii (berkhoffii) and
B. ­clarridgeiae and B. elixbethae cause naturally occurring
disease in dogs and cats, with B. henselae, B. koehlerae,
and B. weissii also infecting cats, and are considered
emerging zoonotic agents. These gram-negative, intracellular rods cause blepharitis, conjunctivitis, anterior
uveitis (Figures 19.1, 19.2), hyphema, and RD due to vascular hypertension. Chorioretinitis in cats and dogs also
occurs. Lymphadenopathy and conjunctival ulceration
may be present. The infection is flea related in cats and
tick related in dogs, and has a high incidence in hot and
humid climates. The bacteria adhere to and penetrate
red cells, thus making every organ system vulnerable to
hematogenous spread. Treatment of systemic bartonellosis in dogs and cats involves the use of systemic antibiotics such as azithromycin, enrofloxacin, or doxycycline for
several weeks.

swollen, and ­protrude. Papillary hypertrophy of the conjunctiva may occur.

Differential diagnosis
Conjunctivitis is found in many types of eye diseases. It
may be infectious (herpes, calicivirus, Mycoplasma, and
Chlamydia in cats) or noninfectious. It may be ­primary
or be secondary to ulcerative keratitis, ­
episcleritis,
glaucoma, anterior uveitis, eyelid disease (entropion,
­
19.1

MYCOPLASMA
Definition/overview
Mycoplasma spp. are considered a rare cause of conjunctivitis in cats. They are also isolated from normal cats.

Etiology
Mycoplasma felis, M. gatae, and M. arginini are a cause of
conjunctivitis in catteries and research colonies where
stress may contribute to disease. Mycoplasma canadense,
M. cynos, M. lipophilum, and M. hyopharyngis are also
reported. The disease is not self-limiting in all cases.

Figure 19.1 Rubeosis iridis, corneal haze, lens opacity,
and pigment on the lens capsule in the eye of a cat with
bartonellosis. The pupil is dilated from topically administered
atropine.
19.2

Pathophysiology
Conjunctival cytology reveals a predominantly neutrophilic response. Mycoplasma organisms are coccoid or coccobacillary basophilic clusters found in focus at the level
of the cell membrane. Herpesvirus infection may predispose to mycoplasmal conjunctivitis.

Clinical presentation
Initially, conjunctivitis may be unilateral, with the opposite eye usually becoming affected in 7–14 days. Early
in the disease the ocular discharge is serous, with chemosis, hyperemia, and blepharospasm also present.
With time, the exudate increases, becoming mucopurulent and the chemosis more severe. The thick exudate
may adhere to the conjunctiva and appear as a pseudomembrane. The nictitans may become hyperemic and

K22463_C019.indd 822

Figure 19.2 Fibrin in the anterior chamber obscures the pupil
in this cat with bartonellosis.

26/04/16 1:01 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

ectropion, blepharitis), orbital cellulitis, nasolacrimal
duct obstruction, keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), atopy,
environmental irritation, and neoplasia (lymphoma).

Diagnosis
A red eye with no other findings tends to be the basis
on which conjunctivitis is diagnosed. The Mycoplasma
organisms can be cultured or the diagnosis made based
on finding the characteristic cytologic inclusions.

Management
Treatment of conjunctivitis due to M. felis consists of
application of topical antibiotic ophthalmic ointment for
several weeks. Effective antibiotics include tetracycline
and chloramphenicol.

VIRAL INFECTIONS
(See also Chapter 21: Infectious diseases.)

FELINE CALICIVIRUS
Definition/overview
Calicivirus conjunctivitis is suspected when conjunctivitis accompanies oral ulcers in cats. The calicivirus is
not as pathogenic to the conjunctiva as feline herpesvirus (FHV). Specific topical antiviral preparations are not
available for viruses other than herpesvirus.

RABIES
Definition/overview
Rabies in dogs and cats may show as pupillary dilation,
uveitis, slowed palpebral and corneal reflexes, and photophobia due to neurologic dysfunction.

CANINE HERPESVIRUS

823

Etiology
Canine distemper is caused by a large RNA morbillivirus.
The virus is spread mainly by inhalation of aerosolized
respiratory viral particles or other infected secretions
such as urine. Widespread vaccination of dogs has markedly decreased the incidence of canine distemper. It can
also generate an immune response in cats.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of CDV infection can vary with the age
and immune status of the dog and the strain of the virus.
CDV infection has systemic features ranging from mild to
severe coughing, dyspnea, lethargy, anorexia, v
­ omiting,
diarrhea, and central nervous system (CNS) signs. Ocular
signs include serous to mucopurulent bilateral ocular discharge, chorioretinitis, RD, KCS (Figures 19.3–19.8) (which
may last 4–8 weeks or be permanent), corneal ulcers,
optic neuritis (sudden blindness), and cortical blindness. Chronic retinochoroidopathies are seen as areas
of increased tapetal reflectivity (gold-medallion lesions)
and altered pigmentation in tapetal and non-­tapetal fundic areas. Perivascular cuffing of retinal ­vessels and axonal demyelination are present histologically.

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.1–19.3.

Diagnosis
Conjunctival scrapings reveal mononuclear ­
leukocytes
and giant cells initially, then neutrophils. Intracellular
inclusion bodies in conjunctival epithelial cells may
be noted. Immunofluorescence of conjunctival smears
may be positive 5–10 days post infection, although
the virus disappears 21–28 days post infection.

19.3

Definition/overview
Dogs infected with canine herpesvirus may have a transient bilateral conjunctivitis, panuveitis, dendritic ulcerative keratitis, cataracts, and optic neuritis progressing
to optic nerve atrophy. Retinal dysplasia may be found
in infected pups. Therapy for dogs with corneal ulcers
­utilizes antiviral medications.

CANINE DISTEMPER VIRUS
Definition/overview
Ocular signs have been observed in animals with acute
and chronic infection with canine distemper virus (CDV).

K22463_C019.indd 823

Figure 19.3 Pigmentary keratitis, mucoid discharge, and lid
margin blepharitis are associated with KCS in this dog.

26/04/16 1:01 am

824

Diseases of specific organ systems

19.4

19.6

19.5

Figures 19.4–19.6 Dog with optic neuritis from canine
distemper. (19.4) Note the dilated pupils. (19.5) The blurred
edges of the optic disk indicate active optic neuritis. (19.6)
Optic nerve atrophy is present 2 months later.

19.8

19.7

Figure 19.7 KCS and demodicosis are present in this dog
with canine distemper.

K22463_C019.indd 824

Figure 19.8 A focal area of chorioretinitis from distemper is
found in this dog.

26/04/16 1:01 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

Table 19.1 Etiologies of optic neuritis.
Vascular embarrassment/ischemia
Idiopathic
Canine distemper
Reticulosis
Fungal (cryptococcosis, blastomycosis)
Toxoplasmosis
Neoplasia (especially squamous cell carcinoma,
­lymphosarcoma, nasal tumors, meningiomas)
Toxins (lead, arsenic, thallium, ethyl/methyl alcohol,
c­ hlorinated hydrocarbon)
Septicemia
Vitamin A deficiency
Feline infectious peritonitis
Orbital inflammation
Trauma (e.g. after proptosis of globe)
Table 19.2 Etiologies of keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Loss of lacrimal tissues:
•• Congenital/breed-related
•• Idiopathic atrophy
•• Iatrogenic removal of nictitans gland
Secondary reaction to chronic conjunctivitis or blepharitis
Secondary reaction to systemic disease (canine distemper,
feline herpes, leishmaniasis)
Drugs (atropine, several sulfonamides, general anesthesia)
Loss of innervation (e.g. traumatic, infectious, iatrogenic,
neoplastic)
Idiopathic
Immune-mediated
Radiation

Table 19.3 Etiologies of chorioretinitis.
Dogs
Viral: distemper
Bacterial: any septicemia or bacteremia (e.g. leptospirosis,
brucellosis)
Rickettsial: ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever,
borrelia
Fungal: aspergillosis, blastomycosis, histoplasmosis,
cryptococcosis
Algal: geotrichosis, protothecosis
Parasites: ocular larval migrans, toxoplasmosis,
l­ eishmaniasis, neosporosis
Cats
Viral: FeLV, FIV, FIP
Bacterial: any septicemia
Fungal: cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis
Parasites: toxoplasmosis, ophthalmomyiasis, ocular larval
migrans

K22463_C019.indd 825

825

Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
assays have been shown to be both sensitive and specific
for detection of CDV.

Management
Treatment is aimed at controlling secondary infections,
although ribavirin inhibits CDV replication in vitro.
Supportive treatment improves the chance for recovery
and quality of life. Vaccination is the key to preventing
CDV infection.

INFECTIOUS CANINE HEPATITIS
Definition/overview
Canine adenovirus 1 (CAV-1) may cause ocular signs
including anterior uveitis and corneal edema in naturally
infected dogs, and in dogs vaccinated with the modified
live canine adenovirus type I vaccine. Due to the potential
reaction to CAV-1, newer vaccines now contain CAV type
2 to minimize the incidence of this condition.

Etiology
CAV-1 is a DNA adenovirus.

Pathophysiology
The corneal edema is a result of an Arthus-type hypersensitivity reaction in the corneal endothelium rather
than direct viral replication. Classically, 14–21 days post
vaccination or 10–21 days following natural infection, a
severe, generally unilateral anterior uveitis with aqueous
flare, hypotony, and corneal edema (‘blue eye’) appears in
affected eyes (Figure 19.9). The anterior uveitis generally
resolves over a 2–3-week period, although persistent corneal edema can occur.
19.9

Figure 19.9 Infectious canine hepatitis causes immunemediated damage to the corneal endothelium and corneal
edema (‘blue eye’).

26/04/16 1:01 am

826

Diseases of specific organ systems

Clinical presentation
Ocular complications include bullous keratopathy,
­keratoconus/keratoglobus, phthisis bulbi, and secondary
glaucoma. Complications are most likely to occur in the
Afghan Hound.

Differential diagnosis
Table 19.4.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the clinical history and signs, and
immunohistochemistry for CAV-1 and detection of viral
DNA using PCR in infected ocular tissue.

Management
Therapy is symptomatic and includes topically administered corticosteroids, hyperosmotics, atropine, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

FELINE HERPESVIRUS (RHINOTRACHEITIS)
Definition/overview
FHV-1 is a double-stranded DNA virus that is highly species specific. FHV-1 has marked tropism for the conjunctival epithelium and less so for the corneal epithelum. The
virus is spread from cat to cat through fomites, aerosolization, or direct contact.

Etiology
Herpesvirus is the major cause of respiratory disease and
associated conjunctivitis in cats. It is estimated that >90%
of cats are seropositive to the virus with as many as 80%
of infected cats remaining latently infected on a life-long
basis. Approximately 45% of these latently infected cats
shed virus throughout their life. Cats with chronic herpetic conjunctivitis may also be feline immunodeficiency
virus (FIV) positive.

Pathophysiology
Table 19.4 Etiologies of anterior uveitis.
Exogenous:
•• Trauma
•• Perforating wounds or exogenous introduction of
infection
•• Intraocular surgery
Endogenous:
•• Extension of disease from cornea or sclera
•• Ulcerative keratitis
•• Interstitial keratitis
Infectious:
•• Canine hepatitis
•• Systemic mycoses – blastomycosis
•• *FeLV
•• *FIP, FIV, FeSV, herpesvirus, toxoplasmosis,
cryptococcosis
•• Brucellosis, leishmaniasis
•• Septicemia in general
•• Leptospirosis
Parasitic:
•• Dirofilariasis, eosinophilia in dogs
•• Toxoplasmosis
•• Toxocara canis
Hypersensitivity:
•• Lens-induced uveitis
•• Unknown antigenic response
•• Hepatitis vaccine reaction
Intraocular neoplasia (lymphoma particularly)
Idiopathic
Immune-mediated
*Common causes in cats.

K22463_C019.indd 826

FHV-1 infects the epithelial surfaces of the respiratory
tract and conjunctiva and, to a lesser degree, the corneal
epithelium, and then ascends by axons of sensory neurons
to the trigeminal ganglion to establish life-long latency
with a potential for recrudescence. Cytolytic pathology
and immune-mediated disease are associated with FHV-1
infection. FHV-1 was isolated from the conjunctiva, cornea, uveal tract, retina, optic nerve, ciliary ganglion, pterygopalatine ganglion, trigeminal ganglion, brainstem,
visual cortex, cerebellum, and olfactory bulb of infected
cats during the acute phase. Trigeminal and cranial cervical ganglia harbor latent virus in the latent phase.

Clinical presentation
Early signs of herpesvirus conjunctivitis include a bilateral serous ocular discharge that becomes mucopurulent
with time (Figures 19.10–19.15). Secondary bacterial
infections enhance the mucopurulent exudate.
Dendritic corneal and conjunctival ulcers from viral
induced cytolysis and larger geographic immune-­
mediated stromal ulcers can be associated with FHV
(Figures 19.16–19.19). Symblepharon and iridocyclitis
are also noted in some infected cats. KCS may develop
with time. Corneal sequestration and eosinophilic keratitis are also associated with herpes in cats.

Differential diagnosis
Conjunctivitis is found in many types of eye diseases. It
may be infectious (herpesvirus, calicivirus, Mycoplasma
and Chlamydia in cats) or noninfectious. Conjunctivitis

26/04/16 1:01 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

may be primary or be secondary to u
­ lcerative keratitis,­
anterior uveitis, eyelid disease, orbital cellulitis,
­nasolacrimal duct obstruction, KCS, atopy, e­ nvironmental
­irritation, and neoplasia (lymphoma).

827

19.12

Diagnosis
Immunofluorescent antibody (IFA) testing of c­ onjunctival
or corneal scrapings for herpesvirus and Chlamydia is
available at many laboratories. Because it is an IFA test,
prior fluorescein staining may yield false positives, so
scrapings should be taken before staining. Positive IFA
tests are more common early in the course of the disease.

19.10

Figure 19.12 Dendritic rose bengal-positive lesions of the third
eyelid conjunctiva are present in this cat with herpesvirus.
19.13

Figure 19.10 Bilateral conjunctival chemosis, hyperemia, and a
slight mucoid discharge are found in this cat with herpesvirus.
19.11

Figure 19.13 The dark corneal lesion with corneal fibrosis and
vascularization is a corneal sequestrum and is associated with
feline herpesvirus.
19.14

Figure 19.11 Chemosis is so severe in this cat with herpesvirus
that the cornea can be barely seen.

K22463_C019.indd 827

Figure 19.14 Eosinophilic keratitis is associated with feline
herpesvirus in this cat.

26/04/16 1:01 am

828

Diseases of specific organ systems

19.15

19.18

Figure 19.18 Generalized stromal keratitis is caused by FHV-1
in this cat.
19.19
Figure 19.15 Linear, dendritic corneal ulcers are unique to
feline herpesvirus.
19.16

Figure 19.16 Herpetic dendritic ulcers staining positive for
fluorescein and conjunctival chemosis are present in the eye of
this cat.

Figure 19.19 Severe conjunctival hyperemia and chemosis
caused by FHV-1 in a cat.

19.17

Figure 19.17 Symblepharon from herpesvirus is present in
this cat.

K22463_C019.indd 828

PCR and reverse-transcriptase PCR testing are more
­accurate than the IFA tests. Although the extreme sensitivity (and specificity) of PCR has improved detection
of virus, it has also confirmed that virus can be demonstrated in up to 31% of apparently normal cats.
Clinically, keratoconjunctivitis with dendritic branching corneal ulcers is diagnostic of herpesvirus infection
(Figures 19.15, 19.16). Herpetic keratitis in the cat may
or may not be associated with upper respiratory disease.
Lymphocytes generally predominate early and large
mononuclear cells are not uncommon. Neutrophils and
giant epithelial cells are seen with chronic or secondary
infection. Intranuclear inclusion bodies are seen very
rarely, if ever, in clinical cases.

26/04/16 1:01 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

Management
Therapy for herpesvirus conjunctivitis consists of topical
antiviral preparations and broad-spectrum antibiotics to
control the secondary bacterial infection. The efficacy of
the antiviral medication in controlling the herpesvirus
conjunctivitis (without corneal involvement) is variable.
Herpesvirus vaccines are available for cats; however,
herpesvirus conjunctivitis can occur in vaccinated cats.
Recurrent herpesvirus may be associated with the immunosuppression by FIV/FeLV.
Antiviral agents should be prescribed when ocular signs
are severe, persistent, or recurrent, or when there is corneal ulceration, although topical antivirals and other ophthalmic medications are often irritating to affected cats.
Initial treatment includes topical cidofovir q12h or
topical idoxuridine (0.5%) or trifluorothymidine (1%)
­
5 times a day. Oral L-lysine (500 mg q12h) can reduce
virus shedding in latently infected cats. Oral famciclovir
(90 mg/kg PO q8h) for 3 weeks can improve ocular and
systemic FHV disease.
Acyclovir (200 mg PO q8h) is useful in combination
with interferon. Systemic interferon may be beneficial in
cats that are refractory to other therapies. Alpha-2 interferon may be administered (3 U/ml/cat PO q24h for the
life of the cat, or 30 U/ml/cat PO q24h for 7 days, off 7 days,
on 7 days, etc.).
Client education is important. Herpesvirus infection
may be chronic and recurrent, especially during times of
stress. Recurrent and chronic herpes infections may suggest systemic immunosuppression so cats should be evaluated for FeLV and FIV.

829

in the CNS and eye. A fatal Arthus-type immune reaction
of cats is associated with infection with the FIP virus.

Clinical presentation
There is increased risk of development of disease in young
cats and in Abyssinians, Bengals, Birmans, Himalayans,
Ragdolls, and Rexes. Ocular signs may occur without concurrent systemic signs or may be prodromal to systemic
signs. The ocular signs are often bilateral. There have
been several cases of remission in cats with ocular signs
only and high FIP antibody titers. Clinical signs include
pyogranulomatous anterior and posterior uveitis, aqueous flare, ‘mutton fat’ keratic precipitates, hypopyon,
synechiae, secondary glaucoma, RDs, choroiditis, retinal
hemorrhages (Figures 19.20–19.23), vasculitis with pyogranulomatous sheathing or cuffing of retinal vessels,
and optic neuritis.

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.2 and 19.3.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis can be aided by clinical pathologic alterations,
with the total plasma protein frequently >7.8 g/dl and
a polyclonal gammopathy and elevated serum fibrinogen present. Anterior chamber paracentesis reveals
protein, fibrin, neutrophils, erythrocytes, and mononuclear cells. Serology and PCR are not reliable. Reversetranscriptase PCR and a direct IFA test may aid diagnosis
of FIP.
19.20

FELINE INFECTIOUS PERITONITIS
Definition/overview
Effusive (wet) and non-effusive (dry) forms of feline
infectious peritonitis (FIP) are known. The dry (noneffusive or parenchymatous) form of FIP is associated with
the most ocular changes (32% of dry cases have ocular
lesions).

Etiology
FIP is caused by a coronavirus.

Pathophysiology
The virus replicates in oropharyngeal tissues and at the
tips of intestinal villi. Dissemination of the virus in macrophages leads to pyogranulomatous lesions in a variety
of tissues. Granulomatous lesions in the dry form are
often found outside the abdomen and thorax, especially

K22463_C019.indd 829

Figure 19.20 Rubeosis iridis or iris neovascularization is
found in this cat with FIP.

26/04/16 1:01 am

830

Diseases of specific organ systems

19.21

19.23

Figure 19.23 Focal regions of granulomatous and pigmented
chorioretinitis are noticed in this cat with FIP.

Figure 19.21 Perivascular cuffing, retinal edema, and retinal
hemorrhage are noticed in the retina of a cat with FIP. (Courtesy
B. Spiess)

19.22

Management
Therapy for FIP is symptomatic for the anterior uveitis
and systemic problems. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha neutralizing antibody may have some benefit for therapy.

FELINE LEUKEMIA VIRUS
Definition/overview
FeLV causes anterior uveitis (one or both eyes), retinitis,
cataracts, irregular or asymmetrical pupils, and secondary glaucoma.

Etiology
FeLV is a retrovirus whose genetic material is transmitted from host to host as RNA. Anterior chamber or vitreal
paracentesis may reveal neoplastic cells in cases of lymphosarcoma, but is usually nonspecific as to the etiology.

Pathophysiology

Figure 19.22 This cat with FIP has ‘mutton fat’ keratic
precipitates.

K22463_C019.indd 830

Retinal changes include hemorrhages (Figure 19.24), pale
retinal vessels (anemia), leukemic infiltrates appearing
as multifocal gray opacities, and RDs. Infection with FeLV
appears to cause little in the way of ocular disease with
the exception of its role in lymphosarcoma. The uveal
tract is a common site for metastasis of leukemic lymphocytes. Cats with ocular lymphosarcoma may present initially with signs of mild uveitis, including miosis, aqueous

26/04/16 1:01 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

flare and keratic precipitates, or subtle iridal masses. As
the disease progresses, the iris becomes greatly thickened and distorted with the infiltration of tumor cells.
Glaucoma is a common sequela as lymphoma cells infiltrate the iridocorneal angle.

Clinical presentation
Corneal changes are uncommon, but include keratitis,
edema, and a keratopathy appearing as a wide opaque
band of neoplastic stromal lymphoid cells. Conjunctivitis
with proliferation of lymph follicles may be noted. Horner’s
syndrome associated with mediastinal lymphosarcoma in
FeLV-positive cats has been noticed. Isolated iridal tumor
formation may occur. Abnormal pupillary light reflexes
(‘spastic pupil’) have also been associated with FeLV infection of the ciliary ganglia and short ciliary nerves.

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.2 and 19.3.

Diagnosis
The ELISA is an excellent in-hospital screening test with
good sensitivity. Confirmatory indirect IFA testing should
be performed on a peripheral blood smear of ELISApositive cats. Recently, a PCR test has been used for the

19.24

831

detection of FeLV antigen. FeLV antigens are present in
corneal tissue and all potential donors should be tested
prior to transplantation.

Management
Therapy for FeLV includes management of opportunistic
infections and supportive therapy. Cats with an increased
risk of exposure to FeLV should be vaccinated regularly.

FELINE PANLEUKOPENIA VIRUS
Definition/overview
Feline panleukopenia virus is a parvovirus known to
cause cerebellar hypoplasia and retinal dysplasia, with
retinal rosette formation, loss of normal retinal layered
architecture, and reduced thickness of the neural ­retina in
kittens. Focal retinal dysplasia appears as sharply defined
hyperreflective areas in the tapetal fundus and depigmented areas in the nontapetal fundus. Optic nerve hypoplasia may also occur with the feline panleukopenia virus.

FELINE IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS
Definition/overview
FIV is a lentivirus. FIV infection results in progressive
loss of CD4+ T-helper cells early in the infection, followed
by depletion of CD8+ T cells in the advanced stages of the
disease. Anterior uveitis (Figure 19.25), lens luxation,
pars planitis, and conjunctivitis are reported with FIV.
Anterior uveitis and chorioretinitis are the most common ocular findings in cats co-infected with both FIV and
Toxoplasma gondii. Currently marketed PCR assays for the
detection of FIV lack sensitivity and vary significantly in
accuracy. Positive serum antibody titers for toxoplasmosis are more common in FIV-positive cats.
19.25

Figure 19.24 Linear flame hemorrhages of the nerve fiber layer
and a focal exudative retinal detachment are noticed in this
FeLV-positive cat.

K22463_C019.indd 831

Figure 19.25 Iridal hyperpigmentation is associated with
chronic uveitis due to FIV in this cat.

26/04/16 1:01 am

832

Diseases of specific organ systems

FELINE SARCOMA VIRUS

19.26

Definition/overview
Feline sarcoma virus is associated with uveal melanoma
and anterior uveitis in cats.

PROTOZOAL INFECTION
LEISHMANIASIS
Definition/overview
Leishmaniasis is of major public health significance in
Central and South America, the Mediterranean region,
Africa, and Asia. The visceral and cutaneous forms are
associated with blepharitis, keratitis, conjunctivitis, KCS,
anterior uveitis, rubeosis iridis, and severe panuveitis.
Dogs are more commonly affected than cats.

Etiology
Leishmania spp. are diphasic protozoan parasites. Dogs are
considered important primary reservoirs of Leishmania
spp., and sandflies (Phlebotomus or Lutzomyia spp.) are
the vectors. Naturally occurring leishmaniasis has been
increasingly reported in cats in the last few years. Feline
leishmaniasis is generally caused by L. mexicana in Texas,
L. major in Egypt, and L. (Viannia) panamensis in Brazil.
L. infantum, a causative agent of feline leishmaniasis in
southern France and Italy, also causes leishmaniasis in
dogs.

Pathophysiology
Transmission to vertebrates is via bites from infected
sandflies. The incubation period may be a few months
to between 3 and 4 years. Over 80% of infected dogs
have ocular lesions with both eyes affected. The inflammation is mononuclear with the organism found in
histiocytes.

Clinical presentation
Melting ulcerative keratitis, KCS, blepharitis, exudative
panuveitis, optic neuritis, and secondary glaucoma are
reported with Leishmania infections (Figure 19.26).

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.3 and 19.4.

Diagnosis
The Leishmania organism can be diagnosed with histopathologic or immunoperoxidase evaluation of
cutaneous or ocular biopsy specimens, PCR of anticoagulated blood, or isolation of the organism from the

K22463_C019.indd 832

Figure 19.26 Leishmaniasis is causing keratouveitis in this dog
from Italy. (Courtesy A. Guandalini)

subcutaneous tissue, bone marrow, or lymph node aspirates. Serologic tests are available that use ELISA and
indirect IFA testing.

Management
Allopurinol combined with sodium stibogluconate has
been successful for the treatment of canine leishmaniasis, but prognosis is always guarded. Symptomatic therapy is used for the ocular lesions.

TOXOPLASMOSIS
(See also Chapter 21: Infectious diseases.)

Definition/overview
Ocular signs of toxoplasmosis are more common in cats
than dogs. Toxoplasmosis in cats occurs with ocular signs
alone or it can occur with generalized systemic involvement of the liver, heart, lungs, and meninges.

Etiology
Toxoplasmosis is an infection caused by the obligate
intracellular coccidian parasite Toxoplasma gondii.

Pathophysiology
Oral ingestion of tissue cysts or oocysts results in spread
of Toxoplasma organisms to extraintestinal organs via the
blood or lymph. Focal necrosis of the heart, eye, and brain
results due to proliferation of T. gondii. Uveitis secondary to toxoplasmosis may result from rapid replication
of tachyzoites within ocular tissue or from deposition

26/04/16 1:01 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

of immune complexes within uveal tissue. Intraocular
production of antibodies specific for T. gondii has been
reported, and the organism has been identified within
the uveal tract by histopathology and in the aqueous
humor by PCR.

Clinical presentation
The uveitis is frequently documented as multiple foci of
retinitis or retinochoroiditis (Figure 19.27) with varying
degrees of anterior uveitis in cats. In dogs, chorioretinitis,
optic neuritis, and, less frequently, anterior uveitis and
inflammation of extraocular muscles are present.

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.3 and 19.4.

Diagnosis
The presumptive diagnosis of toxoplasmosis can be
made in cats with signs of uveitis and a positive serum
titer, although ocular toxoplasmosis in cats is not associated with markedly elevated titers. Histologic demonstration of the parasite is the sole definitive means of
confirmation. ELISA tests for detection of IgM antibodies and toxoplasma antigen have been developed for
­diagnosis of toxoplasmosis. Levels of the IgM class of
antibody rise and fall over approximately 3–4 months
after infection whereas those of the IgG class of antibody
may rise more slowly and remain elevated in cats for
years after exposure to T. gondii. Fecal examination for
Toxoplasma oocysts can be useful to determine if the cat
is shedding and potentially infectious for other animals
or humans.

19.27

833

Management
Owners should be instructed in basic hygienic rules to
prevent toxoplasmosis. It is a zoonotic disease. Treatment
for toxoplasmosis includes antimicrobial agents
(­
sulfadiazine, pyrimethamine, clindamycin) and supportive therapy. In case of localized ocular involvement,
the standard treatment for uveitis is also definitively
indicated.

FUNGAL DISEASES
(See also Chapter 21: Infectious diseases.)
Systemic mycotic infections that commonly involve the
eyes include cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, b
­ lastomycosis,
and coccidioidomycosis. Inhalation is believed to be the
primary route of infection, with ­hematogenous spread to
the eye. Diagnosis is based on c­ linical and ocular signs,
radiographs, stained smears from tissue samples, ocular
paracentesis, peripheral lymph node aspirates, and serology. Miscellaneous f­ungi/yeasts causing conjunctivitis,
endophthalmitis, keratitis, and/or chorioretinitis include
Nocardia spp., Candida spp., Geotrichum spp., Aspergillus
spp., Sporotrichum spp., and Paecilomyces spp. Candida has
caused corneal ulcers in cats. The systemic aspergillosis
(Aspergillus terreus) of German Shepherd Dogs often has
ocular manifestations.

CRYPTOCOCCOSIS
Definition/overview
Cryptococcosis is an opportunistic systemic fungal infection. It is not a contagious disease. Cats are more frequently affected than dogs with cryptococcosis, which is
considered to be the most common feline systemic fungal
infection. Dog breeds typically affected include American
Cocker Spaniels, Dobermanns, Great Danes, and Labrador
Retrievers.

Etiology
Cryptococcosis is caused by the saprophytic yeast-like
organism Cryptococcus neoformans. C. neoformans is
­associated with soil enriched with avian feces containing
high levels of nitrogen. Birds such as pigeons are considered
to be significant vectors of Cryptococcus spp. The organism
is most commonly inhaled from the environment.

Pathophysiology
Figure 19.27 Extensive retinal hemorrhage and detachment
are associated with intraocular toxoplasmosis in this cat.

K22463_C019.indd 833

Cryptococcosis may infect the eye by hematogenous
means or by extension from the nose or CNS. The organisms may be found in the ocular tissues, including the
vitreous.

26/04/16 1:01 am

834

Diseases of specific organ systems

Clinical presentation
Cats have respiratory, CNS, ocular, and skin lesions,
while dogs have mainly CNS and ocular lesions. Dogs
may also show gastrointestinal (GI) and neurologic
signs. The ocular signs of cryptococcosis in cats include

dilated, nonresponsive pupils, exudative RDs, granulomatous chorioretinitis (Figure 19.28–19.31), optic
neuritis, and anterior uveitis. Dogs may show exudative g
­ ranulomatous chorioretinitis, optic neuritis, and
dilated pupils.

19.28

19.30

Figure 19.28 A large, focal, granulomatous lesion with
hyperpigmented regions caused by cryptococcosis in a cat.

Figure 19.30 Fuzzy white areas in the nontapetal region of this
cat with cryptococcosis indicate active chorioretinitis.

19.29

Figure 19.29 Inactive focal regions of chorioretinitis in a cat
with cryptococcosis.

K22463_C019.indd 834

19.31

Figure 19.31 Tapetal discoloration is present with
chorioretinitis in this cat with cryptococcosis.

26/04/16 1:01 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

835

19.32

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.3 and 19.4.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on identification of the organism by
cytology or histology. Organisms may be identified in
subretinal or vitreal aspirates, or cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) tap. A latex agglutination test against capsular antigens is available.

Management
Cryptococcosis has been treated in cats with ketoconazole,
combination amphotericin B and 5-flucytosine therapy,
and 5-flucytosine alone. Combination amphotericin B/
5-flucytosine therapy or fluconazole is recommended for
dogs. Itraconazole can also be used to treat cryptococcosis
in dogs and cats.

COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS
Definition/overview
Coccidioidomycosis is a systemic fungal infection found
in dogs, and rarely in cats. It is not a contagious disease.
It appears to be a posterior segment disease, which can
extend to the anterior segment.

Etiology
Coccidioidomycosis is caused by a dimorphic fungus
Coccidioides immitis, found in the alkaline soil of the
dry climate of the southwestern USA, western Mexico,
and central America. Infection is through inhalation of
arthrospores from the environment.

Pathophysiology
Hematogenous and lymphatic dissemination of endospores causes disseminated disease. The eye is one of
several organs that are most commonly affected. A granulomatous uveitis, either unilateral or bilateral, is most
common. The cornea, iridocorneal angle, ciliary body, retina, and choroid are affected. Hyphema and vitreal hemorrhage may be present.

Clinical presentation
Systems affected include the respiratory tract, skin, bone,
joints, heart, testicles, eyes, and CNS. Ocular signs may
appear first, and consist of granulomatous panuveitis,
secondary glaucoma, orbital cellulitis, keratitis, retinitis,
and RDs (Figure 19.32).

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.3 and 19.4.

K22463_C019.indd 835

Figure 19.32 A large chorioretinal granuloma caused by
C. immitis is present in the nontapetum of this dog.

Diagnosis
Vitreous aspiration may reveal endospores. Serologic
tests are available in endemic areas.

Management
Oral ketoconazole and itraconazole are the current treatments of choice for coccidioidomycosis. Long-term use of
ketoconazole in dogs has been found to be associated with
the development of cataracts. Cats have been successfully
treated with fluconazole.

HISTOPLASMOSIS
Definition/overview
Histoplasmosis is a systemic fungal infection of dogs and
cats. It is a primary respiratory disease with dissemination to liver, spleen, intestine, lymph nodes, CNS, and
bone. Histoplasmosis is widespread in alkaline soils of
North and South America, but particularly in the Ohio,
Mississippi, and Missouri River valleys.

Etiology
Histoplasmosis is caused by the dimorphic fungus
Histoplasma capsulatum. Infective conidia are either
inhaled or ingested. Young hunting breeds of dogs may
have an increased risk.

26/04/16 1:01 am

836

Diseases of specific organ systems

Pathophysiology

Management

Dissemination is hematogenous or via the lymphatics to the lungs, GI tract, liver, bone marrow, and eyes,
­resulting in a granulomatous inflammatory response.
The c­ horoid appears to be a preferred target region in
the eye.

Early or mild cases may respond to ketoconazole or
itraconazole alone. Combined treatment with amphotericin B and ketoconazole or itraconazole is preferred in
patients with severe or fulminating disease.

Clinical presentation
Ocular signs in dogs and cats include granulomatous chorioretinitis (Figures 19.33–19.37), optic neuritis, and RD
with some signs of anterior uveitis.

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.3 and 19.4.

Diagnosis
Normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia is
the most common hematologic abnormality. The organism may occasionally be seen in circulating mononuclear cells and eosinophils. Definitive diagnosis is based
on identification of the organism, usually by cytology,
biopsy, and culture.

19.33

Figure 19.33 Retinal hemorrhage, elevation of retinal vessels,
and peripapillary retinal edema due to histoplasmosis-induced
chorioretinitis in a cat.

K22463_C019.indd 836

BLASTOMYCOSIS
Definition/overview
Blastomycosis is a systemic fungal infection that usually originates in the lungs and then disseminates to
other organ systems. All systems of the body may be
infected. The disease affects dogs more than cats. Bluetick
Coonhounds, Treeing-walker Coonhounds, Pointers, and
Weimaraners have been reported to have the highest risk
of Blastomyces dermatitidis infection.

Etiology
Blastomycosis is caused by the dimorphic fungus
B. dermatitidis. Infection usually occurs by inhalation of
infective conidiophores from the environment. Water
and soil contamination play an important role in the
spread of blastomycosis.

19.34

Figure 19.34 Resolution of the retinal edema and
chorioretinitis, with subsequent retinal hyperpigmentation,
following itraconazole therapy for histoplasmosis in the cat
in Figure 19.33.

26/04/16 1:01 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

19.35

837

19.36

19.37

Figure 19.35–19.37 Cat with histoplasmosis. (19.35)
Histoplasmosis is present as a lump in the upper lid of this
cat. (19.36) A large fold of retina ventral to the optic disk
indicates retinal detachment due to the histoplasmosis. (19.37)
The contralateral eye has diffuse retinal edema and early
detachment caused by histoplasmosis.

Pathophysiology

Clinical presentation

Alveolar macrophages phagocytize the conidia. These
cells may be transported into the pulmonary interstitium
from where they gain access to the vascular system and
lymphatics. Hematogenous and lymphatic dissemination
leads to pyogranulomatous disease. The eyes are commonly affected in both dogs and cats.

Ocular signs include conjunctivitis (Figure 19.38), ­corneal
edema, corneal vascularization, a
­nisocoria, anterior
­uveitis (Figure 19.39), secondary glaucoma, exophthalmos (retrobulbar inflammation), ­
granulomatous chorioretinitis (Figures 19.40–19.42), RD, and optic ­neuritis
(Figure 19.43).

K22463_C019.indd 837

26/04/16 1:01 am

838

Diseases of specific organ systems

Differential diagnosis

Management

Tables 19.1, 19.3 and 19.4.

Diagnosis is based on the cytologic identification of
the characteristic organisms within infected lymph
nodes, skin, and eyes.

Itraconazole, ketoconazole, and amphotericin B are
effective in treating some cases of canine blastomycosis. Systemic corticosteroids combined with an antifungal may also be necessary to successfully treat
blastomycosis. Itraconazole, ketoconazole, and eto­
conazole/amphotericin B can be used to treat blastomycosis in the cat.

19.38

19.39

Diagnosis

Figure 19.38 Severe iridocyclitis and conjunctivitis in a dog
with blastomycosis.

Figure 19.39 Conjunctival blastomycosis of the third eyelid
in a dog.

19.40
19.41

Figure 19.40 A large subretinal granuloma with multiple
hyperreflective foci indicates active chorioretinitis in the
nontapetum and optic neuritis in this dog with blastomycosis.

K22463_C019.indd 838

Figure 19.41 A large yellow retinal abscess from blastomycosis
is present in this dog.

26/04/16 1:01 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

19.42

839

(Figures 19.44, 19.45). German Shepherd Dogs are at
increased risk. Diagnosis is made based on identification and culture of urine sediment, serum, synovial fluid,
19.44

Figure 19.42 Periorbital swelling from blastomycosis-induced
endophthalmitis.

19.43

Figure 19.44 Bilateral vitreal haze in a dog with aspergillosis.
19.45

Figure 19.43 Optic neuritis, peripapillary retinal edema, and
retinal hemorrhages in a dog with blastomycosis.

ASPERGILLOSIS
Definition/overview
Aspergillosis is caused by the filamentous fungus
Aspergillus spp. Animals are infected opportunistically after inhaling Aspergillus spores. Disseminated
aspergillosis has been reported to cause panuveitis,
chorioretinitis, exudative RDs, and endophthalmitis

K22463_C019.indd 839

Figure 19.45 Severe active granulomatous chorioretinis caused
by aspergillosis in the dog in Figure 19.44.

26/04/16 1:01 am

840

Diseases of specific organ systems

vitreous, lymph node, or intervertebral disk fine-­needle
aspirate biopsy specimens. Treatment is directed at
eliminating the organism by administering amphotericin B, itraconazole, or fluconazole IV. Regardless, the
­prognosis for recovery from disseminated aspergillosis
is poor.

19.46

ALGAE
PROTOTHECOSIS
Definition/overview
Protothecosis is a rare and fatal algal disease in the dog
and cat. The disseminated disease is most common in
Collies, Boxers, and large breed dogs.

Etiology
Protothecosis is caused by two species of green algae,
Prototheca zopfii (causes disseminated disease) and P. wickherhamii (associated with skin disease). These organisms
are found in animal wastes and sewage. They are transmitted by ingestion of contaminated food, soil, or water.

Figure 19.46 A subretinal granuloma elevates the retinal
vessels dorsal to the optic disk. Focal hyperpigmented areas of
chorioretinitis are also found in this dog with protothecosis.
19.47

Clinical presentation
Systemic features in dogs include intermittent or protracted bloody diarrhea, CNS signs, skin lesions, lymphadenopathy, and respiratory and renal signs. Cats are
reported to have skin lesions only. Ophthalmic signs
are severe in >50% of the reported cases in dogs, and
include focal, diffuse, granulomatous chorioretinitis
(Figures 19.46–19.48), vitreal exudate, RDs and degeneration, retinal hemorrhage, and panuveitis. The ocular
signs may be the initial clinical abnormality, and are
usually bilateral.

Differential diagnosis

Figure 19.47 Bilateral vitreal haze in a dog with protothecosis.
19.48

Tables 19.3–19.6.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by clinical signs, tissue aspiration, histologic
and cytologic examination, and culture. Because colitis is
one of the more common systemic signs associated with
protothecosis, any dog with a history of hemorrhagic
diarrhea and ocular lesions should be considered to be a
candidate for this diagnosis.

Management
Amphotericin B and itraconazole were effective in two
cases, but most systemic infections are fatal.

K22463_C019.indd 840

Figure 19.48 Note the anterior uveitis and vitreal opacification
from protothecosis in the dog in Figure 19.47.

26/04/16 1:02 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

Table 19.5 Etiologies of sudden blindness.
Bilateral dilated and nonresponsive pupils:
•• Optic neuritis/GME
•• Retinal detachments
•• Acute glaucoma
•• Postictal (transient blindness)
•• Sudden acquired retinal degeneration
•• Ivermectin toxicosis
Normal pupils and light reflexes (cortical blindness):
•• Congenital (hydrocephalus, lissencephaly, storage
disease)
•• Metabolic (hypoglycemia, hepatic encephalopathy)
•• Toxic (lead poisoning)
•• Nutritional (thiamine deficiency)
•• Traumatic/vascular (embolus)
•• Hypoxic: postictal, respiratory or cardiac arrest
•• Infectious (canine distemper, toxoplasmosis, FIP)
•• Neoplastic (e.g. reticulosis, meningioma)
•• Idiopathic
Normal pupils and light reflexes:
•• Cataracts

Table 19.6 Etiologies of retinal detachments.
Associated with Collie eye anomaly, retinal dysplasias
Systemic infectious diseases: mycoses, FIP, toxoplasmosis,
lymphosarcoma/FeLV, and other intraocular inflammatory
diseases
Neoplastic disease causing solid detachment
Traction detachments associated with vitreoretinal
adhesions
Trauma
Vitreal degeneration
Sudden decreases in intraocular pressure
Serous or fluid detachments (vasculitis, uremia, vascular
hypertension)
Extraocular pressure
Retinal holes

841

is the most common. E. canis infection is associated with
acute, subclinical, and chronic phases.

Etiology
E. canis is a small pleomorphic rickettsial organism that
infects circulating mononuclear cells. The brown dog tick,
Rhipicephalus sanguineus, is the arthropod vector of E. canis.

Pathophysiology
The prevalence of ocular lesions in canine ehrlichiosis
has been reported as 10–37% and they are typically bilateral. Ocular lesions result from platelet deficiency, vasculitis, or both. Chronic disease occurs in those dogs unable
to mount an effective immune response to the organism.
Neurologic signs consistent with ­meninogoencephalitis
are typical of dogs with disease manifestations that
develop during chronic infection.

Clinical presentation
Systemic features include lymphadenopathy, fever, nasal
discharge, thrombocytopenia, and pancytopenia, with
an underlying vasculitis. The ophthalmic signs include
tortuous retinal vessels with gray perivascular circular
retinal foci in the early stages. Chorioretinitis and retinal
vasculitis appearing as dark gray spots with surrounding
hyperreflectivity in the tapetal fundus, subretinal hemorrhages, RD, optic neuritis, and papilledema are found
in the later stages. Anterior uveitis, iridal petechiae,
hyphema, and keratic precipitates may also be prominent
(Figures 19.49, 19.50).

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.4 and 19.6–19.8.

Diagnosis

(See also Chapter 21: Infectious diseases.)

In the clinical setting, a diagnosis of ehrlichiosis is usually made on the basis of clinical signs, hematologic
abnormalities, and serology. Nonregenerative anemia
and thrombocytopenia are the predominant hematologic
findings. Diagnosis of ehrlichiosis also involves direct
visualization of morulae in peripheral blood smears,
detection of E. canis antibodies, or PCR amplification of
Ehrlichia spp. DNA.

Definition/overview

Management

RICKETTSIA
EHRLICHIA CANIS

Ehrlichiosis is a tick-borne systemic disease known to be
caused by a variety of rickettsial species. Several species
of Ehrlichia are known to infect the dog, although E. canis

K22463_C019.indd 841

Tetracycline and doxycycline are used for systemic therapy. Anterior uveitis is treated with topical corticosteroids and atropine.

26/04/16 1:02 am

842

Diseases of specific organ systems

19.50

19.49

Figure 19.49 Retinal detachment involves nearly the entire
retina in this dog with ehrlichiosis.

Figure 19.50 A blood clot is attached to the anterior lens
capsule in this dog with ehrlichiosis.

Table 19.7 Etiologies of hyphema.

ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER

Uveitis associated with viral/bacterial/parasitic/fungal/
immune-mediated diseases
Congenital anomalies
Trauma (blunt trauma to head or globe, penetrating wounds
of globe)
Intraocular tumors
Coagulopathies
Hyperviscosity syndromes
Hypertension
Retinal detachment
Glaucoma

Definition/overview

Table 19.8 Etiologies of retinal hemorrhage.
Trauma
Bleeding disorders
Blood parasites
Hyperviscosity syndromes
Retinal inflammation
Neoplasia and lymphoreticular diseases
Congenital retinal/vascular anomalies
Hypertension
Severe anemia

K22463_C019.indd 842

Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) is a rickettsial disease of several vertebrate species that is transmitted by
ticks of the genus Dermacentor.

Etiology
RMSF is caused by Rickettsia rickettsii, the type species of
the spotted fever group rickettsiae.

Pathophysiology
After entering the circulatory system, the rickettsiae
replicate in the endothelial cells of capillaries and small
blood vessels. Direct damage to the endothelial cells leads
to vascular inflammation, necrosis, and increased vascular permeability. This process results in extravasation of
fluid and blood cells into the extravascular fluid space.
Varying degrees of damage are shown by the extent of
ocular abnormalities.

Clinical presentation
RMSF has ocular signs of scleral injection/edema, ­anterior
uveitis, hyphema, retinal edema, and focal ­
retinal
petechiae associated with a mucopurulent ­
oculonasal

26/04/16 1:02 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

discharge, cough, lymphadenopathy, muscle and joint
­
pain, vasculitis, splenomegaly, and ­
thrombocytopenia
(Figure 19.51).

843

Tables 19.4 and 19.6–19.8.

in cats, and is considered a zoonotic disease. Dogs may
be a reservoir for infection in cats. C. psittaci ­genotype
C i­nfection in dogs can cause keratoconjunctivitis.
Clinically induced infections with C. abortus have also
led to conjunctivitis. C. psittaci and C. abortus are both
zoonotic.

Diagnosis

Etiology

Differential diagnosis

Diagnosis is based on direct immunofluorescent testing
for the organism, serologic testing, PCR, or rickettsial
culture.

C. felis is an obligate intracellular bacterium that contains
both DNA and RNA.

Management

Ocular disease results from host cell lysis that occurs
during the release of Chlamydia elementary bodies.
Intracytoplasmic inclusions known as elementary bodies
within conjunctival epithelial cells and neutrophils may
be noticed in conjunctival cytologic scrapings early in the
disease.
As the disease progresses, the discharge becomes
mucoid and then mucopurulent, the chemosis decreases,
and the conjunctiva becomes hyperemic and thickened.
Follicular conjunctivitis occurs in chronic untreated
cases. If untreated, infection with C. felis can produce
chronic conjunctivitis. Asymptomatic carrier states can
exist, and are likely significant in spreading the organism
within a population.
Chlamydophilosis may be complicated by co-­infection
with other microorganisms including Mycoplasma spp.,
Bordetella bronchiseptica, feline calicivirus, FHV-1, and FIV.

Tetracyclines are used for systemic therapy. Anterior uveitis is treated with topically administered corticosteroids
and atropine.

CHLAMYDIA
Definition/overview
Chlamydia felis, the cause of feline ‘pneumonitis’, produces a mild conjunctivitis in cats. Along with FHV-1 it
is the most common infectious cause of conjunctivitis

19.51

Pathophysiology

Clinical presentation
Initially, the disease is unilateral, becoming bilateral in
7–14 days. Early in the disease, the conjunctiva is chemotic, glistening, and grayish-pink, and the ocular discharge
is serous. Sneezing is also present early in the disease.
Severe blepharospasm occurs and may cause a secondary
spastic entropion.

Differential diagnosis
Conjunctivitis is found in many types of eye diseases. It
may be infectious (herpesvirus, calicivirus, Mycoplasma
and Chlamydia in cats) or noninfectious.

Diagnosis
Figure 19.51 Multiple deep retinal focal hemorrhages are
present in this dog with Rocky Mountain spotted fever.

K22463_C019.indd 843

Diagnosis of chlamydophilosis has been e­stablished
by using a variety of ELISAs or using cell culture.
Chlamydia spp. can be cultured in many types of

26/04/16 1:02 am

844

Diseases of specific organ systems

mammalian and avian cells. Finding the characteristic
inclusion body within the conjunctival epithelial cell
cytoplasm on cytologic examination of Giemsa-stained
conjunctival smears may be helpful in lending support
for a diagnosis of chlamydophilosis. However, inclusions
are typically only detectable during early infection, and
in some cases not at all. PCR assays have become available
for the diagnosis of C. felis.

Management
Treatment of chlamydial conjunctivitis consists of t­ opical
tetracycline, erythromycin, rifampin, ­fluoroquinolones,
or azithromycin for several weeks. Systemic therapy may
also be necessary. Vigorous therapy should be continued
for several weeks after clinical signs subside. Follicular
conjunctivitis is treated by anesthetizing the cat and rupturing the follicles by vigorously rubbing with a gauze
sponge or scraping with a surgical blade. Topical tetracycline and corticosteroids are then applied, unless the
corneal epithelium is damaged. Recurrence of disease
is common in catteries and research colonies due to the
short immunity to C. felis. C. felis may cause disease in
humans; therefore, owners and technicians are advised
to exercise care and observe strict hygiene when handling or treating infected cats. Vaccination may be necessary to prevent reoccurrence.

NEMATODIASIS
Ocular filariasis is associated with immature canine
heartworms (Dirofilaria immitis) in the anterior chamber
or vitreous. Signs of anterior uveitis are evident, and the
photophobic filarid fourth-stage larva may move from
the anterior to posterior chamber. The immature heartworm must be surgically removed to be curative. Ocular
larval migrans (Toxocara canis and Balisascaris procyonis)
causes anterior uveitis and focal chorioretinitis. Visual
impairment is generally mild. Diagnosis is by serologic
testing and larval identification. Treatment involves
surgical removal of the larvae and anthelmintics and
anti-inflammatories.

MISCELLANEOUS SYSTEMIC DISEASES
Ocular manifestations of hypercalcemia from hyperparathyroidism, neoplasia, renal failure, and hypoadrenocorticism may be associated with white, perilimbal

K22463_C019.indd 844

calcium crystals on the conjunctiva, corneal calcification,
corneal degeneration, and cataracts. Sustained hypocalcemia due to primary hypoparathyroidism, postparturient h
­ ypocalcemia, acute kidney injury or chronic kidney
disease, acute pancreatitis, and intestinal malabsorption can cause focal punctate to linear cataracts to form
in the anterior and posterior cortices of the lens of dogs
and cats.

HYPERVISCOSITY SYNDROME
Definition/overview
Hyperviscosity syndrome results from abnormal microcirculatory changes due to increased serum viscosity. The
severity of hyperviscosity syndrome is linked to the size,
shape, type, and concentration of large molecules (e.g.
imunoglobulins [IgG and IgM]) in the bloodstream. (See
Appendix: Clinical cases.)

Etiology
Hyperviscosity may be caused by monoclonal gammopathy (multiple myeloma, macroglobulinemia, lymphocytic
leukemia), polycythemia, renal disease, hepatic tumors,
and extreme leukocytosis (>100,000/µl).

Pathophysiology
The hyperviscosity results in thromboembolism, sludging of plasma, and hemorrhages in the CNS and eye.
Dilated and tortuous retinal vessels, retinal hemorrhages, and RD may be a result of sludging of blood in
small vessels, hypertension, thrombocytopenia, coagulation abnormalities, and poor delivery of oxygen and
nutrients.

Clinical presentation
Ocular changes are noticed very early in disease and
include retinal hemorrhage (Figure 19.52), retinal
venous dilatation and segmentation, retinal vascular
tortuosity, ‘box-carring’ of retinal vessels, microaneurysms of the retina, subretinal hemorrhage, RD
(Figures 19.53–19.55), perivascular retinal folding, and
papilledema. Anterior uveitis and secondary glaucoma
may also be present.

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.3, 19.4 and 19.8.

26/04/16 1:02 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

19.52

845

19.53

Figure 19.52 Multiple focal retinal hemorrhages and a small,
peripheral, serous retinal detachment in an 18-year-old
Siamese cat with hyperviscosity syndrome.
19.55

19.54

Figures 19.53–19.55 Dog with macroglobinemia and hyperviscosity syndrome. (19.53) Note the undulating retinal detachment
with retinal hemorrhages in the dilated pupil. (19.54) Note the corneal edema from secondary glaucoma. (19.55) Histology. The right
retina is detached with a large amount of PAS-positive subretinal fluid present. Intraretinal PAS-positive deposits, retinal vessel
dilatation, and retinal pigment epithelium hyperplasia are noted. (×250)

Diagnosis
A coagulation assessment (platelet count, partial thromboplastin time, prothrombin time), serum protein electrophoresis, and serum viscosity measurements should
be undertaken. Animals should undergo a thorough anterior segment and funduscopic examinations.

Management
Plasmapheresis may be used to treat the hyperviscosity.
Specific antineoplastic therapy directed at the underlying disease is indicated.

K22463_C019.indd 845

HYPERLIPIDEMIA
Definition/overview
Hyperlipidemia is an increase in plasma concentration
of triglycerides and/or cholesterol. Hyperlipidemia represents an abnormal finding in fasted dogs and cats,
and, when present, is indicative of either increased
production or reduced degradation of lipoproteins.
Hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism, p
­ ancreatitis, and renal (e.g. nephrotic syndrome) as
well as hepatic (e.g. cholestasis) diseases can be associated

26/04/16 1:02 am

846

Diseases of specific organ systems

with hyperlipidemia. Both primary and secondary hyperlipidemias may show ocular signs. Dogs and cats are commonly affected.

Etiology
Hyperlipidemia in dogs may be primary as an idiopathic hyperlipoproteinemia in the Beagle, Briard, Collie,
Miniature Schnauzer, and Shetland Sheepdog, or be secondary to diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, pancreatitis, lipoprotein lipase deficiency, renal and liver disease,
or Cushing’s disease. Hyperlipidemia can occur in cats
for several reasons, including postprandial hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, exogenous corticosteroid administration, megestrol acetate administration, nephrotic
syndrome, lipoprotein lipase deficiency, idiopathic hyperchylomicronemia, and familial hyperchylomicronemia.

Clinical presentation
Increased triglycerides may result in brain dysfunction,
acute pancreatitis, lipid-laden aqueous humor with anterior uveitis, and lipemia retinalis (Figures 19.56–19.59).
Increased serum cholesterol can cause lipid keratopathy.

Differential diagnosis
Table 19.4. Other causes of corneal opacity, including corneal ulcers, scars, and inflammatory cellular infiltrates,
must also be ruled out.

19.57

Pathophysiology
Altered lipid metabolism leads to lipemia of ocular blood
vessels, corneal opacities, and lipemic aqueous. The term
lipemia retinalis describes excess lipid within the retinal
vessels, thus giving them a pale appearance. In both cats
and dogs, it is the large, triglyceride-rich ­lipoproteins
(e.g. low-density lipoproteins) that produce a visible
lipemia. Hyperlipidemia may also manifest with lipids in the anterior chamber. A prerequisite for gaining
access to the anterior chamber by the large, lipid-laden
molecules is alteration of the blood–aqueous barrier, presumably resulting from pre-existing uveitis. It is unclear,
­however, whether the lipids incite or are the result of
uveitis.

Figure 19.57 Lipidosis of the cornea in a hypercholesterolemic
Dobermann.

19.56

19.58

Figure 19.56 Lipemia retinalis in a kitten with a lipoprotein
lipase deficiency.

K22463_C019.indd 846

Figure 19.58 Hyphema and lipid aqueous in a lipemic dog with
anterior uveitis.

26/04/16 1:02 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

847

19.60

19.59

Figure 19.59 Lipemic aqueous in a dog.

Figure 19.60 Exudative retinal detachment in a dog with
nephrotic syndrome.

19.61

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on measurement of specific serum
lipoproteins by electrophoresis or ultracentrifugation.

Management
Lipid-laden aqueous and lipemia retinalis resolve with
resolution of the primary disorder and dietary modifications (low-fat diet), if necessary. Iridocyclitis should be
treated if present. Corneal lipid accumulation may not
resolve. Only a limited number of lipid lowering drugs
have been used in dogs, with varying degrees of success
for persistent hyperlipidemia. These include gemfibrozil,
fish oils, cholestyramine, and lovastatin.

SYSTEMIC VASCULAR DISEASE
RDs associated with systemic hypertension due to chronic
kidney disease are common in older cats and noticed in
dogs (Figure 19.60). RDs result in blindness, but vision
may return if the hypertension responds to medical treatment and dietary adjustment.

ANEMIA
Definition/overview
Ocular manifestations of severe anemia in cats and
dogs include conjunctival pallor, pale attenuated retinal v
­ asculature, varying degrees of retinal hemorrhage,

K22463_C019.indd 847

Figure 19.61 Hyphema shown in one of both eyes from
a dog with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia and
thrombocytopenia.

and subtle changes in tapetal reflectivity. Retinal hemorrhages are more likely to be observed, however, and
are more dramatic if accompanied by thrombocytopenia.
The lack of red blood cells renders vascular endothelial cells hypoxic, thereby increasing vascular fragility
and allowing retinal hemorrhages to occur in cats and
dogs. The tapetal reflection is generally normal, which
differentiates the retinal vessel attenuation from anemia from the attenuation found with retinal degeneration. Thrombocytopenia is more likely to cause ocular
lesions such as hyphema and anterior uveitis in dogs
(Figures 19.61, 19.62).

26/04/16 1:02 am

848

Diseases of specific organ systems

19.62

Cats over 8 years of age should have their fundi examined
for lesions related to hypertension.

Pathophysiology

ARTERIAL HYPERTENSION

Renal pathology causes an increase in ­renin–­angiotensin–
aldosterone activity, which, in combination with
increased plasma levels of norepinephrine, causes peripheral ­
vasoconstriction. Incoming arterial and capillary
blood at high pressure causes vasospasm, tissue hypoxia
of the capillary beds allowing changes in vessel permeability, and exudation of fluid, plasma, or blood, resulting
in development of infarcts and end organ damage.
The consequence of ocular vascular hypertensive
changes is an initial vascular constriction in the retinal
arterioles in response to increased blood pressure, which
when sustained, results in occlusion and ischemic necrosis of the vessel walls with resultant increased vascular
permeability. The ocular circulation is not tolerant of
such changes in its microcirculation.

(See also Chapter 12: Nephrology/urology.)

Clinical presentation

Figure 19.62 Iritis from thrombocytopenia in a dog.

Definition/overview
Repeatable measurements of systolic pressure exceeding 160 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure measurements >100 mmHg are considered arterial hypertension.
Blindness is one of the most common presenting complaints with this disorder, as the eye is particularly sensitive to the effects of high blood pressure. Hypertensive
retinopathy in many cats is a slow, insidious process. Vision may be spared if the process is identified
and controlled before severe ocular disease develops.
Consequently, old cats with diseases such as chronic kidney disease and hyperthyroidism should be screened for
systemic hypertension.

Etiology
Arterial hypertension in dogs and cats has been ­associated
with old age, chronic anemia, h
­ ypercholesterolemia, athero-/arteriosclerosis, high salt diets, ­
obesity, and idiopathic essential hypertension. Secondary h
­ ypertension in
dogs is now recognized as being a common complication
of renal disease (60–80% of cases), hyperadrenocorticism
(59–86% of cases), ­pheochromocytoma (>50% of cases), diabetes mellitus, primary ­hyperaldosteronism, ­hypothyroidism,
and hyperthyroidism.
Hypertensive cats have been shown to have a greater
prevalence of retinal lesions (48%) compared with normotensive cats (3%). In addition, cats with retinopathies
had higher blood pressure (262 ± 34 mmHg) than hypertensive cats without retinal lesions (221 ± 34 mmHg).

K22463_C019.indd 848

Ocular features in cats and dogs with hypertension
include retinal arteriolar tortuosity, preretinal hemorrhage, retinal edema, perivasculitis, anterior uveitis, vitreal and anterior chamber hemorrhage, RDs, and retinal
atrophy (Figures 19.63–19.73). In severe cases, irreversible blindness occurs.

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.3–19.5 and 19.8.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on serial measurements of blood
­pressure. A complete blood count (CBC), urinalysis, and
serum biochemical profiles should be undertaken in all
patients.

Management
Treatment includes salt restricted diets, diuretics, and
calcium channel blockers such as amlodipine. Eyes
­
with RD and little hemorrhage may reattach and recover
vision if the RD has been present for less than 2–3 weeks.

HEMORRHAGIC RETINOPATHY
Definition/overview
Hemorrhage with retinal disease may be manifested as
preretinal bleeding in the vitreous, superficial linear retinal hemorrhages, small circular focal deep retinal areas
of hemorrhage, and large, dark subretinal hemorrhages.

26/04/16 1:02 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

19.63

Figure 19.63 Retinal hemorrhages, vitreal haze, retinal
edema, and optic neuritis in a dog with renal failure and
hypertension.

849

19.65

Figure 19.65 Hyphema is present in this cat with systemic
hypertension.

19.64
19.66

Figure 19.64 Extensive retinal folding and detachment and
preretinal hemorrhages in a dog with systemic hypertension.

K22463_C019.indd 849

Figure 19.66 Hypertensive retinopathy manifested by dorsal
vitreal hemorrhage and intraretinal hemorrhage in a cat.

26/04/16 1:02 am

850

Diseases of specific organ systems

19.67

19.69

Figure 19.67 Preretinal ‘keel boat’ hemorrhage in a cat with
hypertensive retinopathy.

19.68

Figure 19.69 ‘Box carring’ of retinal vessels indicates that the
retinal tissue pressure is elevated and retinal perfusion reduced
in this cat with systemic hypertension.
19.70

Figure 19.68 Arteriolar aneurysms are present in the retina of
this dog with systemic hypertension.

Etiology
Hemorrhagic retinopathy is seen associated with anemia,
systemic hypertension, coagulopathies, and systemic
infections. The cat has an apparently unique predisposition to the development of small multifocal areas of

K22463_C019.indd 850

Figure 19.70 Bullous retinal detachment manifested as
folds of opaque tissue posterior to the lens in a cat with
hypertension.

intraretinal and preretinal hemorrhage associated with
severe anemia (Figure 19.74). Lymphosarcoma, reticuloendotheliosis with thrombocytopenia, chronic bleeding
from a duodenal ulcer, FIP, and hemobartonellosis are
other causes for hemorrhagic retinopathy in cats.

26/04/16 1:02 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

851

19.71

19.73

Figure 19.71 Vitreal and retinal hemorrhages obscure the optic
disk in a dog with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia.

Figure 19.73 Retinal detachment and retinal hemorrhages in a
dog with vascular hypertension.
19.74

19.72

Figure 19.72 Hyphema is present in a dog with vascular
hypertension.

Figure 19.74 Vitreal and retinal hemorrhage obscure the
fundus in a cat with systemic hypertension.

Pathophysiology
Vascular constriction in retinal arterioles in response
to increased blood pressure results in occlusion and
ischemic necrosis of the vessel walls, with a resultant

K22463_C019.indd 851

increase in retinal vascular permeability and possible
hemorrhage. Choroidal vascular changes result in subretinal fluid accumulation and RD.

26/04/16 1:02 am

852

Diseases of specific organ systems

Clinical presentation

19.75

Retinal and vitreal hemorrhages may be observed bilaterally in all regions of the fundus in a majority of cats
with hemoglobin values <5 g/100 ml.

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.5, 19.6 and 19.8. Systemic hypertension should
be ruled out with any ocular hemorrhage or RD of
unknown origin.

Diagnosis
Repeated systolic blood pressure measurements >160–180
mmHg are indicative of hypertension.

Management
Functional vision is not usually affected in mildly
­hypertensive cats, and treatment is normally directed
against the primary cause of anemia or hypertension.
Massive vitreal hemorrhage generally results in irreversible blindness. Antihypertensive agents including
beta-adrenergic blockers, diuretics, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, vasodilators, and calcium channel
blockers may be beneficial.

HORNER’S SYNDROME
Definition/overview
Horner’s sydrome (sympathetic denervation) in the dog
and cat is characterized by unilateral or bilateral prolapse of the nictitans, ptosis, anisocoria, and miosis.

Etiology
Sympathetic denervation to the eye can occur at the
hypothalamus, brainstem/cervical cord, T1–T3 spinal
cord segments, vagosympathetic trunk, cranial cervical ganglion, middle ear, ophthalmic branch of cranial
nerve V, long ciliary nerve, and iris dilator muscle. The
most common causes of Horner’s syndrome include anterior mediastinal neoplasia, brachial plexus injury, otitis
media, and cervical trauma. It is commonly idiopathic in
Golden Retrievers and Collies.

Pathophysiology
Loss of sympathetic innervation causes a lack of tone
in the orbital smooth muscle so that the eye retracts
slightly, producing enophthalmos. Loss of innervation to
the muscle of the upper eyelid (Muller’s muscle) and sympathetically innervated tissue in the lower eyelid results
in narrowing of the palpebral fissure and incomplete elevation of the upper eyelid, or ptosis. Lack of sympathetic

K22463_C019.indd 852

Figure 19.75 Miosis, nictitans protrusion, and ptosis are found
on the right side of a cat with Horner’s syndrome caused by
neoplastic involvement of the right middle ear.

tone and enophthalmos results in protrusion of the
­nictitans, which is most prounounced in cats. Reduction
of normal sympathetic tone to the iris dilator muscle
results in the anisocoria and miosis in the affected eye
(Figure 19.75).

Clinical presentation
The Horner’s miotic pupil is not pinpoint in room light.
Constriction still occurs and dilation in dark light occurs,
but not as much dilation as a normal pupil (no dilation
beyond the size of the pupil with a resting iris sphincter
muscle). The causative lesion can occur anywhere along
the sympathetic chain. Intraocular pressure is normal
and vision is present unless the pupil is obstructed by the
protrusion of the nictitans.

Differential diagnosis
Uveitis can cause nictitans prominence when dogs and
cats do not feel well, when the eye is painful, and a miotic
pupil is found with aqueous flare in uveitis. Conjunctivitis
and blepharospasm may be present with many eye
diseases.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on a complete physical examination
and neurologic, otoscopic, and ophthalmologic examinations. Topically administered adrenergics such as 2.5%
phenylephrine will restore the pupil to normal size, reposition the nictitans, and minimize the ptosis if the sympathetic lesion is postganglionic.

Management
The disorder spontaneously resolves in some patients.

26/04/16 1:02 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

853

FELINE DYSAUTONOMIA OR FELINE DILATED
PUPIL SYNDROME

Epinephrine at a concentration of 1:10,000 will induce
retraction of the prolapsed third eyelid.

Definition/overview

Management

Feline dysautonomia or feline dilated pupil syndrome
(Key–Gaskell syndrome or feline autonomic neuropathy)
is much more common in Europe than the USA. A similar
syndrome is found in young, large breed dogs living in
rural areas of the midwestern USA.

Treatment includes supportive therapy with fluids, laxatives, and dietary management. Topical parasympathomimetics may be beneficial. Recovery rates are poor.

Etiology

Definition/overview

The cause is unknown, although lesions in the autonomic
ganglia are consistent with a toxic cause. The bacterium
Clostridium botulinum may be important in the pathogenesis of feline dysautonomia

Ocular manifestations of canine uveodermatologic syndrome (Vogt–Koyanagi–Harada [VKH])-like) are reported
most often in the Akita, Australian Shepherd Dog, Beagle,
Fila, Chow, Dachshund, Golden Retriever, Irish Setter, Old
English Sheepdog, Saint Bernard, Samoyed, Shetland
Sheepdog, and Siberian Husky dogs.

Pathophysiology
Parasympathetic and sympathetic ganglia are equally
affected. There is depletion of neuronal cell bodies, with
many remaining neurons showing an atypical homogeneous cytoplasm, eccentric pyknotic nuclei, and dissolution of Nissl substance. Autonomic nerves show axonal
degeneration but peripheral nerves are comparatively
spared. Ultrastructural changes include derangement of
the rough endoplasmic reticulum, with cisternae lacking
ribosomes and distended with flocculent material. Stacks
of smooth membranous profiles are evident but no normal Golgi bodies.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs include dilated, nonresponsive pupils with
some cats showing dysphagia, prolapsed nictitans, constipation, bradycardia, decreased tear production (Schirmer
tear tests may be as low as 0–2 mm/min), regurgitation
due to megaesophagus, vomiting, and dysuria. Ataxia
and poor proprioception may also occur.

Differential diagnosis
Table 19.2. Dilated pupils are associated with glaucoma
and retinal and optic nerve diseases.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis should be suspected from the characteristic
clinical signs and a definitive diagnosis confirmed by the
presence of lesions in the autonomic ganglia. Urinary
catecholamines are reduced. Pharmacologic testing can
support the diagnosis. Pilocarpine (1%) topically constricts the pupil in affected cats, while topical echothiophate iodide (0.06%) and physostigmine (0.25%) will
cause miosis in normal cats but not dysautonomic cats.

K22463_C019.indd 853

CANINE UVEODERMATOLOGIC SYNDROME

Etiology
This is an autoimmune condition directed against melanin of neural crest (skin, hair, anterior uvea) and neuroectodermal (retina) origin.

Pathophysiology
This syndrome is considered to be an immune-­mediated
reaction to melanin that affects various organs containing melanocytes. It is similar to VKH syndrome
in p
­ eople, although neurologic signs are rare in dogs.
Skin lesions are the result of a Th1-mediated inflammatory response while ocular lesions are the result of
a Th2-mediated inflammatory response. The role of
certain dog leukocyte antigen class II gene alleles may
be ­important regarding the pathogenesis of VKH-like
­syndrome in Akitas.

Clinical presentation
Severe, bilateral panuveitis (Figures 19.76–19.82) and
hypotony, with secondary cataracts, glaucoma, RDs, and
blindness are common. Iris and retinal depigmentation
and poliosis/vitiligo of the face and muzzle are noticed.
Ocular lesions appear before the skin lesions. Dermal and
hair depigmentation (vitiligo and poliosis, respectively)
develop either gradually or rapidly, and they may be
ulcerative in nature. The lesions are usually restricted to
the face, involving the eyelids, nasal planum, and lips, but
the scrotum and footpads are other areas of possible dermal involvement.

Differential diagnosis
Table 19.2.

26/04/16 1:02 am

854

Diseases of specific organ systems

19.78

19.76

19.77

19.79

Figure 19.76–19.79 Husky dog with uveodermatologic (UVD) syndrome. (19.76) Iris color change due to iridocyclitis of the right
eye. (19.77) Iridocyclitis and secondary glaucoma in the eye. (19.78) Focal depigmentation of the retinal pigment epithelium due to
chorioretinitis. (19.79) Depigmentation of the nose accompanies a relapse of UVD syndrome in this dog.

Diagnosis
There is no specific diagnostic test for uveodermatologic
syndrome. The diagnosis is made on the basis of clinical
signs and histopathologic examination of skin biopsies.
Skin biopsy specimens have lichenoid dermatitis, histiocytes, and small mononuclear cells as well as giant
cell infiltrations. The level of melanin in the epidermis
and hair follicles is decreased. Special stains should be

K22463_C019.indd 854

requested in the presence of granulomatous infiltrates
in an attempt to identify microorganisms. Other tests
include a CBC, antinuclear antibody (ANA) test, Coombs
test, and serologic testing for leishmaniasis.

Management
Short-term success with systemically administered
­corticosteroids or azathioprine is good, but recurrence is
­common. Topical treatment of the uveitis is required.

26/04/16 1:02 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

19.80

855

GRANULOMATOUS MENINGOENCEPHALITIS
(See also Chapter 14: Disorders of the nervous system and
muscle.)

Definition/overview
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME) can be seen
alone as a primary ocular disease or, more commonly,
in conjunction with CNS disease. It is probably the most
common inflammatory disease of the canine nervous
system. The ocular signs may occur before CNS signs. The
disease is typically seen in young small breeds, although
any breed or age of dog may be affected.

Etiology
GME is an idiopathic, nonsuppurative inflammatory
disease.
19.81

Pathophysiology
GME is characterized by the proliferation of reticuloendothelial elements and lymphoplastic infiltration of
blood vessels of the CNS, the ciliary body, and the choroid. Perivascular infiltrates are composed of a heterogeneous population of major histocompatibility complex
class-II antigen-positive macrophages and mainly CD3
antigen-positive lymphocytes, supporting a hypothesis
of T-cell-mediated, delayed type hypersensitivity or an
autoimmune disease.

Clinical presentation
19.82

Ocular features include acute, bilateral blindness with
widely dilated, nonresponsive pupils. Uveitis, optic
neuritis (hyperemic, swollen, elevated optic disk, disk
hemorrhage, peripapillary engorged vessels), retinal
inflammation (white perivascular cuffs and yellow–white
patches), RD, and secondary glaucoma are common. The
eye may appear normal if the optic nerve involvement is
posterior to the globe (Figures 19.83, 19.84).

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.1 and 19.4–19.6.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis can only be confirmed at necropsy or by brain
biopsy. MRI and analysis of CSF (increased CSF protein and
­pleocytosis) may enable a tentative diagnosis to be made.
Figure 19.80–19.82 Uveodermatologic (UVD) syndrome.
(19.80) The nose, periocular skin, and eyes are involved in this
Akita. (19.81) Photograph of a ‘normal’ dog that eventually
developed coat depigmentation of ocular lesions from UVD, as
shown in 19.82.

K22463_C019.indd 855

Management
Treatment involves aggressive use of immunosuppressive
corticosteroids often with added immunosuppression
using cytosine arabinoside or cyclosporine A. Gradual

26/04/16 1:02 am

856

Diseases of specific organ systems

19.83

19.85

Figure 19.85 Intraocular lymphosarcoma manifests as
hypopyon in this cat.
19.86

Figure 19.83 Dilated, nonresponsive pupils are present in a
Miniature Pinscher with optic neuritis from granulomatous
meningoencephalitis.
19.84

Figure 19.86 Iridal lymphosarcoma and corneal
edema in a dog.

Etiology
This is a metastatic neoplastic disease to the eye and its
adnexa. Cats may be positive for FeLV.

Pathophysiology
Figure 19.84 A swollen optic disk indicating optic neuritis that
was associated with granulomatous meningoencephalitis.

improvement and temporary remission are possible with
the judicious use of immunosuppressants.

LYMPHOSARCOMA
Definition/overview
Lymphosarcoma is the most common intraocular tumor
of dogs and cats. It is a secondary ocular tumor, and is
usually bilateral.

K22463_C019.indd 856

Systemic involvement precedes or accompanies ocular
lymphosarcoma. Lymphosarcoma with ocular involvement equates to advanced disease and translates to a
shorter survival period for the dog.

Clinical presentation
Lymphosarcoma in dogs and cats (Figures 19.85–19.88)
may manifest as corneal edema, centrally migrating white
bands of neoplastic cells, stromal hemorrhage, corneal vascularization, anterior uveitis with hyphema, hypopyon,
keratic precipitates and secondary glaucoma, and tortuous
retinal vessels, retinal hemorrhages, ­perivascular sheathing, RD, or retinal tissue infiltration by tumor cells (Figures
19.89–19.94). Cats may have cranial nerve dysfunction.

26/04/16 1:02 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

857

19.87

19.90

Figure 19.87 Conjunctival lymphosarcoma masquerades as
conjunctivitis in the right eye of this cat. A cataract is present in
the left eye.

19.88

Figure 19.90 Iris lymphoma caused the iris swelling in the cat
in Figure 19.89.
19.91

Figure 19.91 Iridocyclitis from lymphoma is present in this
mixed-breed dog.

Figure 19.88 This mass on the third eyelid in a dog is
lymphoma.

19.92

19.89

Figure 19.89 Iris thickening is severe in this cat.

K22463_C019.indd 857

Figure 19.92 Lymphosarcoma invasion of the choroid causes a
focal retinal detachment in this cat.

26/04/16 1:02 am

858

Diseases of specific organ systems

Differential diagnosis

DIABETES MELLITUS

Tables 19.3–19.6 and 19.8. Conjunctivitis, hyphema,
anterior uveitis, RD, and glaucoma may be caused by
lymphosarcoma.

(See also Chapter 11: Endocrine disorders.)

Diagnosis
Lymphadenopathy combined with bilateral anterior uveitis or intraocular hemorrhages should cause suspicion of
lymphoma. Enlarged lymph nodes should be investigated
by fine-needle aspiration.

Management
Anterior uveitis and hyphema should be treated by topical corticosteroids and atropine. Medical protocols for
treatment of lymphosarcoma should be instituted.

Definition/overview
There is a high incidence of cataracts in diabetic dogs,
with many cataracts apparently developing rapidly over
days to weeks. Most diabetic dogs form cataracts within
12–16 months after diagnosis.

Etiology
In dogs, inciting factors include obesity, ­immune-­mediated
insulitis, pancreatitis, infection, genetic predisposition,
and insulin-antagonistic diseases. In cats, obesity-­induced
carbohydrate intolerance and amyloid deposition in islet
cells are potential factors.

Clinical presentation
19.93

The most common ocular manifestation of diabetes mellitus in small animals is acute formation of cataracts, often
associated with sudden blindness. Diabetic cataracts in
dogs begin at the lens equator. Diabetic cataracts in cats
involve the posterior cortex initially. Diabetic dogs may
have KCS, reduced corneal sensitivity, and reduced tear
film breakup times (Figures 19.95–19.97).

Pathophysiology

Figure 19.93 Orbital lymphoma pressing on the globe indents
the eye and distorts the optic nerve head.

The cataracts form during periods of hyperglycemia
when glucose enters the lens and is converted by the
enzyme aldose reductase (AR) to sorbitol as the glycolytic
enzyme hexokinase is saturated. Lens sorbitol dehydrogenase (SD) activity is also reduced, which allows sorbitol
19.95

19.94

Figure 19.94 Ultrasound demonstrates the tumor presence
behind the globe in the dog in Figure 19.93.

K22463_C019.indd 858

Figure 19.95 Retinal hemorrhages are present in this dog with
diabetic retinopathy.

26/04/16 1:02 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

859

19.98

19.96‑

Figure 19.98 Lens fibers in the equatorial lens cortex swell and
appear as ‘water clefts’ in this dog with diabetes.
Figure 19.96 A mature cataract with prominent lens Y suture
involvement is caused by diabetes in this dog.
19.97

activity in their aging lens. AR lens activity is highest in
young cats (<4 years).
Ischemic changes in the retina of chronically diabetic
dogs and cats can result in retinal vessel aneurysms and
retinal hemorrhages. These changes may be masked by
the rapid cataract formation.

Differential diagnosis

Figure 19.97 Posterior cortical changes are present in the lens
of this diabetic cat.

Cataracts may be a hereditary condition in specific
breeds. They may also be caused by, aging, advanced
retinal degeneration, anterior uveitis, diseases causing
hypocalcemia, radiation therapy, and milk replacers in
puppies and kittens. Atopy is also associated with cataract
development in humans, and may also play an important
role in cataract formation in dogs living in subtropical
environments.

Diagnosis
to accumulate in the lens. The sorbitol osmotically draws
water into the lens, and the lens fibers swell and rupture
to result in cataracts.
The cat lens generally has less age-matched activity of
both AR and SD than that present in the lens of dogs, but
the ratio of AR to SD is higher in the cat lens than the
dog. Sorbitol should thus accumulate more quickly in diabetic cat lenses than in dogs, but the incidence of diabetic
cataracts is actually lower clinically in diabetic cats than
diabetic dogs. This may be a result of diabetes being primarily a disease of cats >7 years of age who have little AR

K22463_C019.indd 859

Early cataractous changes appear as vacuoles
(Figure 19.98) in the subepithelial equatorial cortex,
which progress to mature, intumescent cataractous lenses
with prominent Y-suture clefting. Anterior uveitis is also
found in some canine diabetics. Diabetic retinopathy is
slow to develop in diabetic dogs and cats.

Management
Surgery is necessary to treat the cataracts of controlled
diabetic patients, and is very successful at restoring
sight.

26/04/16 1:02 am

860

Diseases of specific organ systems

LACRIMAL SYSTEM MANIFESTATIONS OF
SYSTEMIC DISEASE
ACUTE AND CHRONIC
KERATOCONJUNCTIVITIS SICCA

systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid a
­ rthritis,
diabetes mellitus, chronic active hepatitis, and pemphigoid disorders. FHV infection is associated with KCS in cats.

Pathophysiology

Definition/overview
KCS is a disease associated with reduced secretions from
the lacrimal and third eyelid glands. Most cases of chronic
conjunctivitis in dogs are caused by KCS.

Etiology
KCS in dogs is associated with canine distemper, trauma,
irradiation, and drug toxicity (Figure 19.99). It most commonly results from immune-mediated dacryoadenitis.
Canine immune-mediated KCS has also been associated
with atopy, hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticoidism,
19.99

The tri-layered precorneal tear film is critical for maintaining optical clarity and providing nutrition to the
cornea. Lack of tears results in painful corneal and conjunctival degeneration, and often blindness.

Clinical presentation
Blepharospasm, conjunctivitis, chemosis, mucoid to
mucopurulent ocular discharge, corneal pigmentation
and vascularization, and corneal ulcers can be present
(Figures 19.100, 19.101). Cats seem less affected by low
tear levels than dogs.

Differential diagnosis
Table 19.2. KCS is often confused with bacterial
conjunctivitis.

Diagnosis
Decreased Schirmer tear test levels are diagnostic
(<10 mm/minute). Concurrent corneal ulcers must be
identified.

Management
Topically administered cyclosporine A, tacrolimus, or
pimecrolimus, artificial tears, and antibiotics are effective at controlling KCS in up to 80% of dogs with KCS.
Figure 19.99 Severe keratitis from keratoconjunctivitis sicca in
a Pug.
19.100

SJÖGREN’S-LIKE SYNDROME
Definition/overview
Sjögren’s syndrome is a systemic autoimmune disease
directed against glandular tissues. It is characterized by
19.101

Figure 19.100 Rose Bengal is retained in a dog with KCS. The
corneal reflection is dull rather than shiny.

K22463_C019.indd 860

Figure 19.101 The cornea is pigmenting in response to a lack
of tears in KCS.

26/04/16 1:02 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

KCS, xerostomia, lymphoplasmacytic dacryoadenitis, and
lymphocytic sialoadenitis.

Etiology

861

SYSTEMIC DISEASE ASSOCIATED WITH
INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHY
MASTICATORY MUSCLE MYOSITIS

Sjögren’s syndrome is frequently associated with human
autoimmune disease (rheumatoid arthritis, SLE, thyroiditis). A similar syndrome to Sjögren’s syndrome has
recently been recognized in dogs (KCS associated with
SLE, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, other immune
disorders, and xerostomia) and cats.

Pathophysiology
There is immune-mediated destruction of the lacrimal
and salivary glands.

Clinical presentation
Sjögren’s syndrome is characterized by KCS (xerophthalmia) and xerostomia (dry mouth) (Figures 19.102, 19.103).

Differential diagnosis
Table 19.2.

(See also Chapter 8: Digestive diseases [Pharynx to
anorectum].)

Definition/overview
Eosinophilic masticatory muscle myositis is an inflammatory disorder involving the muscles of mastication.
Masticatory myositis typically affects young to m
­ iddle aged
adult dogs and predominantly medium to large breeds
dogs such as German Shepherd Dogs and Weimaraners.

Etiology
The cause is unknown but an immune-mediated r­ eaction
is possible. Neutrophils and eosinophils infiltrate the temporalis and pterygoid muscles to cause pronounced
­masticatory muscle fiber swelling and subsequent fibrosis.

Diagnosis

Pathophysiology

Clinical signs (KCS, keratitis, conjunctivitis), presence of
other immune-mediated systemic diseases (e.g. pemphigus) associated with salivary signs, positive ANA test.

The 2M muscle fibers in the masticatory muscles c­ ontain
a unique type of myosin, which is s­ pecifically involved
in immune-mediated reactions. The p
­
athogenesis
is not understood, although ­
autoantibodies against
type 2M muscle fibers are present in the ­
circulation
and tissue. Bacteria containing antigens s­
imilar
to type 2M muscle fibers may initiate the ­
myositis.
Exophthalmos results from inflammatory ­
swelling

Management
Treatment is the same as for KCS, with additional identification and management of concurrent autoimmune
diseases.
19.102

19.103

Figures 19.102, 19.103 Sjögren’s syndrome. (19.102) KCS in a Weimaraner with Sjögren’s syndrome. (19.103) Xerostomia is also
present.

K22463_C019.indd 861

26/04/16 1:02 am

862

Diseases of specific organ systems

of the muscles of ­
mastication forcing orbital fat
and the globe ­
anteriorly to cause the ­
exophthalmos
(Figures 19.104, 19.105).

anorexia and depression, although tonsillitis, submandibular and prescapular lymphadenopathy, and pyrexia
may occur.

Clinical presentation

Differential diagnosis

Masticatory muscle myositis of the masseter, pterygoid,
and temporalis muscles may cause acute, painful exophthalmos that is followed by chronic muscle atrophy with
enophthalmos and nictitans protrusion. Pain is elicited when opening the mouth. Most dogs present with

Orbital cellulitis and orbital neoplasia.

19.104

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on electromyelography, which
reveals abnormal spontaneous pathologic activity in
the temporal and masseter muscles, peripheral eosinophilia, elevated serum creatine kinase, temporalis
muscle biopsy, and the demonstration of serum 2M
­autoantibodies. MRI detects widespread, symmetrical,
and ­inhomogeneously hyperintense areas in the masticatory muscle.

Management
Systemically administered corticosteroids are indicated
in acute disorders. Uncontrolled myositis leads to painful
masticatory muscle atrophy. Therapy may be life-long.

EXTRAOCULAR MUSCLE MYOSITIS
Definition/overview
Extrocular muscle myositis is common in 8–10-month-old
Golden Retrievers.

Etiology
The specific cause of this focal inflammatory myositis is
unknown at present.

Pathophysiology
19.105

Extraocular muscle myositis is an immune-mediated disease directed against the type I myofibers of the extraocular muscles. The pressure on the optic nerve from the
swollen extraocular muscles can severely reduce optic
nerve axoplasmic flow.

Clinical presentation
The clinical signs are bilateral in most dogs.
A ­
generally nonpainful chemosis precedes exophthalmos in 81% of cases, and optic nerve impingement with optic ­neuritis may occur to cause blindness
(Figures 19.106–19.109).

Differential diagnosis
Figures 19.104, 19.105 A 3-year-old female German Shepherd
Dog with eosinophilic myositis. (19.104) The frontal view shows
exposure conjunctivitis as a result of the swollen extraocular
muscles causing exophthalmos. (19.105) The side view shows
the swollen muscles (arrow). (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C019.indd 862

Table 19.1. Orbital cellulitis and orbital neoplasia.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by serum and muscle biopsy for detection of
type I myofiber antibodies.

26/04/16 1:02 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

19.106

863

19.108

19.107
19.109

Figures 19.106–19.109 Young Golden Retriever with extraocular muscle myositis. (19.106) Bilateral exophthalmos due to the
extraocular muscle myositis. (19.107) The optic disk is slightly swollen. (19.108) MRI shows bilateral extraocular muscle swelling
(arrowheads). (19.109) Four months later, therapy for the extraocular myositis has reduced the exophthalmos.

Management

Etiology

Treatment is the same as for masticatory muscle
myositis.

Most orbital tumors are primary and highly malignant.

Pathophysiology

METASTATIC AND MULTICENTRIC NEOPLASIA
OF THE ORBIT
Definition/overview
Metastatic and multicentric neoplasia of the orbit is common in dogs and cats.

K22463_C019.indd 863

Malignant cell types predominate, with any widely metastatic tumor potentially involving the orbit.

Clinical presentation
Progressive, often painless slow exophthalmos with varying amounts of strabismus and exposure keratitis are
the most common clinical signs (Figures 19.110–19.116).

26/04/16 1:02 am

864

Diseases of specific organ systems

19.110

19.112

Figure 19.110 A retrobulbar fibrosarcoma causing
exophthalmos, nictitans protrusion, and strabismus in this dog.

19.111

Figure 19.112 This pale focal retinal lesion in a cat is a ciliary
body tumor that has metastasized to the retina.
19.113

Figure 19.111 An optic nerve meningioma in the orbit
has caused distortion of the optic disk in this old Labrador
Retriever.

Acute-onset exophthalmos is associated with orbital
inflammatory diseases such as retrobulbar abscesses/
cellulitis. Exophthalmos with pain on attempting to
open the mouth usually indicates a retrobulbar abscess
or cellulitis, with swelling behind the last upper molar on
the affected side also often observed. Dogs with orbital
tumors undergoing necrosis can have the same clinical
signs as dogs with orbital abscesses/cellulitis. Orbital
infections due to systemic coccidioidomycosis, blastomycosis, and cryptococcosis are reported, but orbital cellulitis/abscessation is generally a localized infection.

K22463_C019.indd 864

Figure 19.113 Orbital osteosarcoma has caused focal
peripapillary retinal detachments in this aged cat.

Differential diagnosis
Orbital abscesses/cellulitis, salivary gland mucoceles,
orbital varices.

Diagnosis
Cytologic examination and culture of discharge or aspirates from the orbit, biopsy of masses, exploration of fistulous tracts, ultrasonography, and MRI and CT are very
valuable in evaluating orbital diseases.

26/04/16 1:02 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

19.114

865

Management
Early exenteration is generally the therapy of choice
unless the orbital tumor is well circumscribed. The prognosis is poor for dogs with orbital neoplasia.

CONJUNCTIVAL MANIFESTATIONS OF
SYSTEMIC DISEASE
Definition/overview

Figure 19.114 Third eyelid protrusion occurring bilaterally
from a brain tumor.
19.115

Figure 19.115 Slowly progressive exophthalmos in this dog
was due to a right-sided retrobulbar mass of the orbit and nasal
cavity.
19.116

Many systemic diseases of dogs and cats have nonspecific
conjunctival manifestations. Mild hypoxia in cardiovascular disorders is manifested as conjunctivitis with dilation and darkening of conjunctival vessels. Conjunctival
petechiation may be seen in cases of infectious endocarditis. Conjunctival venous engorgement may be noticed
with congestive heart failure. Anemia may be seen as
pallor or hemorrhage of the conjunctiva. Hyperviscosity
syndromes are associated with conjunctival congestion.
Conjunctival petechiae and ecchymoses are found with
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia and coumarin
(warfarin) toxicity. Icterus of the conjunctiva is found
with liver diseases. Systemic tumors such as lymphoma
may masquerade as simple conjunctivitis.
Calcification deposition of the subepithelial cornea,
termed calcific band keratopathy, is reported in dogs with
hyperadrenocorticoidism. Lymphoma cells can directly
invade the corneal stroma of dogs to cause keratitis,
a migrating white band, vascularization, and stromal
hemorrhage. The anterior uvea is commonly infiltrated
with tumor cells, resulting in moderate to severe uveitis.
Aqueous flare, hypopyon, miosis, and keratic precipitates
may be found.

LIPID KERATOPATHY
Definition/overview
Lipid keratopathy may be induced in hypercholesterolemic states by corneal trauma, ulcers, and surgery.
Corneal lipidosis is reported in Shelties, Collies, German
Shepherd Dogs, and Dobermanns.

Etiology
Lipid keratopathy in the dog is associated with hyperlipidemia, hypothyroidism, pancreatitis, diabetes mellitus,
and spontaneous hyperlipidemia.

Pathophysiology
Figure 19.116 The globe and mass were removed in the dog in
Figure 19.115. The mass was a squamous cell carcinoma.

K22463_C019.indd 865

Lipid keratopathy is characterized by peripheral
and ­
central crystalline corneal stromal opacities
(Figure 19.117). Corneal lipidosis generally does not
­completely regress.

26/04/16 1:02 am

866

Diseases of specific organ systems

19.118

19.117

Figure 19.118 Alopecia and crustiness of the face and eyelids
in a dog with systemic lupus erythematosus.
Figure 19.117 A limbal infiltrate of lipids accompanies elevated
serum triglycerides in this dog with hypothyroidism.

19.119

Clinical presentation
Lipid keratopathy appears as a bilateral, silver or blue–
gray, complete ring at the limbus. The central cornea may
be affected in advanced cases. Vascularization of the cornea may speed lipid deposition.

Differential diagnosis
Rule out causes of corneal opacity including corneal ulcers,
edema, scars, and inflammatory cellular infiltrates.

Diagnosis
Dogs with lipid keratopathy should have a serum lipid
profile performed and be screened for thyroid function,
pancreatitis, and diabetes mellitus.

Management

Figure 19.119 Blepharoconjunctivitis in a dog with
demodicosis.

19.120

Low fat diets may be beneficial in reducing the corneal
opacity. Keratectomy is necessary if vision is significantly
affected by the opacification.

EYELID MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC
DISEASE
Definition/overview
Chronic blepharitis may be associated with systemic
endocrine imbalances such as hypothyroidism. Bacterial,
fungal, parasitic, allergic, and neoplastic (lymphoma and
mast cell tumors) diseases may affect the eyelids (Figures
19.118–19.122). Atopy, exposure to contact allergens, and
autoimmune conditions are reported. Juvenile pyoderma

K22463_C019.indd 866

Figure 19.120 Redness, alopecia, and swelling of the eyelids in
a dog with blepharitis, KCS, and hypothyroidism.

26/04/16 1:03 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

867

19.121

19.123

Figure 19.121 Zinc-responsive dermatosis in a Husky dog with
bilateral blepharitis.

19.122
Figure 19.123 Blepharitis in a cat due to Demodex spp.
infestation.

19.124

Figure 19.122 This mast cell tumor of the left lower lid of a
cat was responsive to strontium radiation.

can affect the lids of puppies. Predisposed breeds include
the Dachshund, Golden Retriever, Labrador Retriever,
Gordon Setter, and Lhasa Apso. Papillomatous eyelid
growths in young dogs may be associated with oral papillomatosis. Demodicosis causing deep lid pyoderma is
reported in dogs and cats (Figure 19.123).
Bilateral and symmetrical hyperkeratotic ‘crustiness’ of the lids is found in Huskies and Malamutes with
zinc-responsive keratosis. An inherited inability to absorb
zinc from the intestines causes the problem. Oral and parenteral elemental zinc supplementation is beneficial and
will be required for the life of the patient.
Ocular manifestations of Ehlers–Danlos syndrome
reported in the cat have been linked to excessive laxity
of the eyelid skin and include entropion with secondary
blepharospasm and keratoconjunctivitis (Figure 19.124).

K22463_C019.indd 867

Figure 19.124 This cat has left-sided blepharospasm and
Ehlers–Danlos-associated cataracts.

Pemphigus foliaceus is the most common immune-­
mediated dermatologic condition affecting the feline
eyelid, and is also found in dogs. Pemphigus foliaceus,
pemphigus erythematosus, pemphigus vulgaris, food
hypersensitivity, and atopy may also affect the lids of cats
and dogs.

26/04/16 1:03 am

868

Diseases of specific organ systems

UVEAL MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC
DISEASES

19.125

INFLAMMATION OF THE ANTERIOR UVEA
Definition/overview
Inflammation of the anterior uvea (iris and ciliary body)
is termed anterior uveitis or iridocyclitis. Inflammation
of the posterior uvea or choroid is termed choroiditis. It
is often useful to discuss inflammation of the anterior
uvea as a distinct entity from the choroid, but inflammation of one region is generally associated with some
degree of inflammation of the other region. Panuveitis
is inflammation of the entire uveal tract, with endophthalmitis also involving the anterior chamber and vitreous. Anterior and posterior uveitis disrupt the protective
blood–ocular barrier and allow blood and blood-derived
compounds access to transparent nonvascular regions of
the eye such that vision can be compromised.

Etiology
Infectious and noninfectious neoplastic, ­
immunemediated, and metabolic systemic diseases can cause
uveitis. Uveitis in cats is caused by systemic diseases such
as FIP, FHV, FeLV-associated disorders, FIV, feline ­sarcoma
virus (FeSV), toxoplasmosis, and systemic mycotic infections. Other causes for feline uveitis include bacteria
(tuberculosis) and hypersensitivity reactions. Uveitis in
dogs is caused by algae, bacteria, fungi, immune-­mediated
diseases, metabolic diseases, parasites (Figure 19.125),
­neoplasms, viruses, and rickettsiae.

Figure 19.125 Heartworm larvae are motile and causing uveitis
in this dog.
19.126

Pathophysiology
Inflammatory mediators are released that disrupt the
blood–ocular barrier and also cause the pupillary sphincter muscles and ciliary muscles to constrict.

Clinical presentation
Miosis, conjunctival hyperemia, corneal edema, hypotony,
hyphema, hypopyon, iris color change, iridal swelling,
keratic precipitates (adherence of clusters of mononuclear inflammatory cells to the corneal endothelium), and
pain may be found with anterior uveitis. Cataracts, deep
corneal stromal vascularization, endophthalmitis, lens
luxation, rubeosis iridis, iris bombé, and secondary glaucoma are adverse sequelae. Choroiditis is associated with
decreased vision, choroidal effusion, choroidal granulomas, optic neuritis, RD, retinal hemorrhage, and vitreal
opacification (Figures 19.126–19.131).

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.4 and 19.7.

K22463_C019.indd 868

Figure 19.126 Keratic precipitates and hyphema in a cat with
anterior uveitis from FIP.
19.127

Figure 19.127 Iridal neovascularization (rubeosis iridis) in a cat
with extreme anemia due to thrombocytopenia.

26/04/16 1:03 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

19.128

869

19.131

Figure 19.131 Iris color change and rubeosis in the right eye of
a cat with chronic uveitis.

Figure 19.128 Hyphema due to renal hypertension indicates
anterior uveitis in this dog.
19.129

Diagnosis
Complete physical and ocular examinations are important in animals with uveitis since they may provide
diagnostic clues to the etiology. Other diagnostic considerations are a CBC, blood chemistries, serologic tests,
and aqueous humor analysis. Cytologic evaluation
and ­bacterial culture of aqueous and vitreous aspirates
may help characterize the etiology of the uveitis. The
uveitis may be unilateral or bilateral in multiple system
diseases.

Managment
Acute unilateral uveitis can be treated empirically.
Bilateral or chronic uveitis is usually due to infection and
should be treated accordingly.
Figure 19.129 An iris color change from blue to brown in the
right eye of this cat may be caused by anterior uveitis or iridal
neoplasia.
19.130

Figure 19.130 Cataracts may occur secondary to uveitis or they
may induce uveitis.

K22463_C019.indd 869

RETINAL AND OPTIC NERVE
MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES
Definition/overview
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (Batten’s disease) is
reported in the English Setter, Tibetan Terrier, the
American Bulldog, American Cocker Spaniel, Australian
Blue Heeler, Border Collie, Chihuahua, Dachshund,
Dalmatian, Miniature Schnauzer, Polish Owczarek
Nizinny, and Saluki. Ceroid is deposited in neurons of
the CNS and in the retina and retinal pigment epithelium. Blindness and neurologic signs occur concurrently. Ophthalmoscopic lesions have not been noted in
the English Setter and Tibetan Terrier, but mild tapetal
hyperreflectivity, mild retinal vascular attenuation, and
optic disk pallor have been noted as early as 2.5 years of
age in affected Miniature Schnauzers.
Fucosidosis is an autosomal recessive glycoproteinosis occurring in the English Springer Spaniel.

26/04/16 1:03 am

870

Diseases of specific organ systems

19.132

The disease is produced by a deficiency of the l­ ysosomal
enzyme ­α-l-fucosidase. While retinal ganglion cells are
vacuolated from the accumulation of substrate, oph­
thalmoscopic lesions have not been reported with the
visual impairment in the affected English Springer
Spaniels.
The retinal dystrophy of the Briard dog is caused by a
defect in polyunsaturated fatty acid metabolism. Plasma
arachidonic acid levels are elevated to twice normal
levels in American Briards with this congenital night
blindness.

CHORIORETINITIS
Definition/overview
Posterior uveitis involves the choroid and cannot be clinically distinguished from retinitis. It is therefore usually
described as chorioretinitis.

Etiology
Chorioretinitis in the cat is frequently caused by toxoplasmosis, FIP, cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, and blastomycosis. Toxoplasmosis and cryptococcosis commonly
involve only the posterior segment, although anterior and posterior uveitis may occur. Granulomatous
choroiditis in cats can also be associated with several
Mycobacterium species. Chorioretinitis in dogs is caused
by distemper, leptospirosis, brucellosis, Rocky Mountain
spotted fever, aspergillosis, blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, protothecosis, toxoplasmosis,
leishmaniasis, and primary and secondary neoplasia.
Potentially toxic drugs such as ivermectin can also cause
chorioretinitis.

Figure 19.132 Focal, sharply delineated areas of inactive
chorioretinitis in a cat.

19.133

Clinical presentation
The signs of retinal or chorioretinal inflammation include
edema, infiltration with inflammatory cells and granuloma formation, hemorrhage, and possible exudative
detachment (Figure 19.132). In dogs, retinal exudates,
hemorrhage, and RD are a sequelae to chorioretinitis
(Figures 19.133, 19.134).

Differential diagnosis
Table 19.3.

Diagnosis
Chorioretinal scars, characterized by hyperreflective
areas in the tapetal region, are observed in normal
healthy cats and dogs and are an indication of a previous
subclinical inflammatory process (Figure 19.135).

K22463_C019.indd 870

Figure 19.133 Inactive chorioretinitis is manifested as a focal
yellow area with a hyperpigmented center in the green tapetum
of this dog.

Management
Treatment is determined by the inciting cause. Systemic
therapy is necessary for treatment of retinal diseases.

26/04/16 1:03 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

19.134

871

Etiology
Bilateral RD suggests a systemic problem. Optic nerve colobomas, severe retinal dysplasia, systemic hypertension
due to renal or cardiac failure, intraocular neoplasia, and
chorioretinitis may cause RD. The condition can be breed
associated in Lhasa Apsos and large breed dogs.

Pathophysiology
The neurosensory retina may be pushed away from the
RPE by accumulation of chorioretinal inflammatory or
neoplastic exudate in the subretinal space (exudative
RD), or the retinal tissue may be torn, with retinal holes
forming, and the retina can be pulled away from the RPE
by vitreal traction from vitreal inflammation or hemorrhage (rhegmatogenous RD). Retinal tears can occur
spontaneously in Lhasa Apsos.

Clinical presentation
Figure 19.134 Chorioretinitis post ivermectin ingestion is
present in this Border Collie.

The pupils are fixed and dilated if the RD is complete.
Small detachments are not associated with blindness, but
total RD is a serious problem with a poor visual outcome
in most cases.

19.135

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.3, 19.5, and 19.6.

Diagnosis
Ophthalmic examination reveals dilated pupils (if bilateral), blood vessels located behind the lens, leukocoria, vitreous degeneration and/or hemorrhage, and an
opaque, folded retina. Ocular ultrasound is diagnostic of
RD in eyes with cataracts.

Management
Systemic medical therapy may be curative in
­exudative RD of short duration (e.g. cats with systemic
­hypertension-induced RD). Rhegmatogenous RD requires
advanced microsurgery. The inciting systemic cause of
the RD must be identified and treated.

OPHTHALMOMYIASIS
Figure 19.135 Hyperreflective areas of retinal atrophy with
pigmentation from inactive chorioretinitis in a cat.

Definition/overview

RETINAL DETACHMENT

Ophthalmomyiasis interna refers to the presence of
dipteran fly larva in the eye.

Definition/overview

Etiology

RD occurs with separation of the inner nine layers of
the neurosensory retina from the single outer retinal
­pigment epithelium (RPE).

Ophthalmomyiasis is caused by the sheep nasal botfly
(Oestrus ovis), warble fly (Cuterebra spp.), or the cattle warble fly (Hypoderma bovis). Larvae gain access to the eye

K22463_C019.indd 871

26/04/16 1:03 am

872

Diseases of specific organ systems

via the blood or via direct migration through the tissues
of the eye.

FELINE NUTRITIONAL RETINAL
­DEGENERATION OR TAURINE RETINOPATHY

Pathophysiology

Definition/overview

Larval migration and/or death incite mild to severe
inflammation of the ocular tissues.

Diets deficient in the amino acid taurine cause retinal
degeneration and dilated cardiomyopathy in cats.

Clinical presentation

Etiology

Anterior uveitis and RDs may also occur with ophthalmomyiasis. Cats are more commonly affected than dogs.
The presence of arcuate or linear areas of depigmention
in the tapetal and nontapetal fundus may be due to traumatic, degenerative, or inflammatory disease of the retina, RPE, and choroid (Figure 19.136). Clinical findings of
ophthalmomyiasis are usually incidental.

Feline nutritional retinal degeneration occurs in cats that
are fed commercial dog food and special diets formulated
for dogs. Improperly formulated vegetarian cat diets can
result in blindness in cats. This problem is unusual in
­outdoor cats that hunt.

Pathophysiology
Taurine is an essential amino acid for cats with
long-term deficiency causing severe retinal lesions.
­
A ­
taurine intake of 110 mg/kg body weight per day
is needed to maintain normal retinal structure and
function.

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.3–19.6.

Diagnosis
Ophthalmomyiasis is evident as curvilinear tracks of retinal degeneration and retinal hemorrhage in dogs and
cats. Larvae may be noticed floating in the vitreous or
actively migrating in the retina.

Clinical presentation

Most cases are incidental findings and require no therapy.
Surgical removal of vitreal larvae can be done to remove
a source of inflammation.

Early lesions appear as bilateral, focal, h
­ yperreflective
regions in the area centralis. If taurine continues to
be deficient in the diet, the retinal lesions progress
to ­symmetrical, horizontal, band-shaped hyperreflective
areas dorsal to the optic disk (Figures 19.137–19.141),
with advanced stages appearing as diffuse generalized
­retinal atrophy and having complete blindness.

19.136

19.137

Managment

Figure 19.136 Curvilinear tracks due to ophthalmomyiasis in a
cat.

K22463_C019.indd 872

Figure 19.137 A nearly complete horizontal band of
hyperreflectivity dorsal to the optic disk is found in a cat with
early taurine retinopathy.

26/04/16 1:03 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

873

19.138

19.140

Figure 19.138 Retinal and optic nerve atrophy, caused by
home-formulated ‘vegan’ cat diet, is present bilaterally in
this cat

Figure 19.140 Choroidal vessel attenuation is present in this
cat with advanced feline taurine retinopathy.

19.139

19.141

Figure 19.139 Feline central retinal degeneration (FCRD) is
manifested as a hyperreflective band dorsal to the optic disk in
this cat. FCRD may be related to dietary taurine deficiency.

Figure 19.141 Generalized tapetal hyperreflectivity with
tapetal striping due to conformation of the atrophic retina to
the choroidal vessels is present in this cat with advanced feline
taurine retinopathy.

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.3, 19.5 and 19.8.

Diagnosis
Measurement of plasma taurine levels is necessary
to determine if taurine deficiency is present (a level
<20 nmol/ml is critically low).

Management
Restoration of vision with taurine supplement is dependent on the degree of damage. The degeneration in early

K22463_C019.indd 873

cases can be arrested if adequate amounts of taurine are
included in the diet. However, taurine supplementation is
of no value restoring vision in eyes with advanced retinal
degeneration and blindness.

ENROFLOXACIN RETINOPATHY
Definition/overview
Enrofloxacin, a fluoroquinolone antibiotic, has recently
been associated with a rare adverse ophthalmic reaction causing an acute, irreversible, retinal degeneration

26/04/16 1:03 am

874

Diseases of specific organ systems

in cats. Pupils are fixed and dilated and the tapetum is
hyperreflective. Vision loss is acute and follows enrofloxacin administration. The reported estimated incidence of this adverse reaction is 1 in 122,414 treated
cats, or 0.0008%. Adherence to the manufacturer’s current ­recommendation for enrofloxacin dosage in cats
(2.5 mg/kg PO q12h) is advisable but may still be too
high for aged cats.

OPTIC NEURITIS
Definition/overview
Optic neuritis is inflammation of the intraocular or intraorbital optic nerve. It may be a manifestation of systemic
illness.

Etiology
Causes include idiopathic, immune, infectious, inflammatory, and neoplastic disorders.

Pathophysiology
Optic neuritis is more of a clinical syndrome than a single disease. Inflammation of the nerve or adjacent tissue
causes damage to the optic nerve axons, vision loss, and
optic nerve atrophy.

PAPILLEDEMA
Definition/overview
Papilledema is noninflammatory swelling of the optic
nerve head. Papilledema results in optic nerve atrophy and blindness if the inciting condition cannot be
eliminated.

Etiology
Papilledema is caused by partial obstruction of axoplasmic flow associated with increased intracranial pressure, and is rarely reported in dogs. Vision is present.
Papilledema is also seen in dogs with elevated intraocular pressure in early glaucoma, and dogs with compression of the optic nerve by retrobulbar tumors.

Pathophysiology
Sustained mechanical trauma to the optic nerve axons
or ischemia to any part of the optic nerve can reduce
axoplasmic flow. Axoplasmic flow of both fast and slow
components becomes reduced at the lamina cribrosa in
papilledema.

Clinical presentation
Dilated pupils and optic nerve head swelling are present,
but vision is maintained.

Clinical presentation

Differential diagnosis

The optic disk appears swollen, with the peripapillary
retina displaying evidence of RD. Retinal and optic disk
hemorrhages and a vitreal haze may be present. The
pupil is fixed and dilated, and vision absent.

Tables 19.1 and 19.5.

Differential diagnosis
Tables 19.1, 19.5, and 19.6. Intraorbital optic neuritis
must be differentiated from glaucoma, RD, cataracts, and
sudden acquired retinal degeneration, a retinal disease
associated with sudden blindness and elevated intraocular glutamate.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on elimination of possible causes, a
CBC, serum chemistry profile, urinalysis, screening for
infectious diseases, heartworm antigen test, thoracic
radiography, and analysis of CSF.

Management
Oral corticosteroids are the drugs of choice in idiopathic
cases. Many cases, however, relapse.

K22463_C019.indd 874

Diagnosis
Elevation and hyperemia of the optic disk, blurring of the
disk margin, filling in of the optic cup, and protrusion of
the disk into the vitreous are found ophthalmoscopically
with papilledema.

Management
Resolution of the elevated intracranial or intraocular
pressure can aid animals with papilledema.

LYSOSOMAL STORAGE DISEASES
Definition/overview
Several lysosomal storage diseases have been identified
in cats and dogs. Storage diseases are characterized by an
accumulation of metabolic by-products within lysosomes,
the cellular organelles that degrade complex macromolecules. Specific lysosomal storage diseases are normally
named according to the specific accumulated product.

26/04/16 1:03 am

Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases

Because this excess material is a normal ­cellular component, the h
­ istopathologic changes result from physical distortion of affected cells rather than from a toxic effect. Most
­lysosomal storage diseases with known modes of inheritance are inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.

ALPHA-MANNOSIDOSIS
Definition/overview
Alpha-mannosidosis is a member of the inherited oligosaccharidoses described in Persian, Domestic Shorthair,
and Domestic Longhair cats that results from a deficiency
in acidic alpha-mannosidase. Ocular abnormalities
described in affected cats include progressive corneal and
lenticular opacification and resting nystagmus.

GLOBOID CELL LEUKODYSTROPHY
Definition/overview
Globoid cell leukodystrophy, or Krabbe’s disease, is a
member of the inherited sphingolipidoses described
in the cat that result from a deficiency in galactocerebrosidase activity. The substrate galactocerebroside
(i.e. ­
galactosylceramide), a constituent of myelin, and
another metabolite of myelin turnover, psychosine (galactosyl sphingosine), accumulate. Ocular manifestations
of this disease in cats include lack of vestibular ocular
reflexes and signs associated with visual deficits including diminished pupillary light reflexes and reduced
menace responses. Galactocerebrosidosis is an autosomal
recessive trait in West Highland White and Cairn Terriers.
Clinical signs of globoid cell leukodystrophy in dogs are
generally rapidly progressive and develop at a young age
(2–6 months). Visual deficits and blindness may result
late in the course of disease, but ophthalmoscopic lesions
have not been observed.

GM1-GANGLIOSIDOSIS
Definition/overview
GM1-gangliosidosis is caused by a deficiency of a lysosomal hydrolase, beta-galactosidase, which produces an
accumulation of GM1-ganglioside in the cerebral cortex
and visceral organs. Ganglion cell swelling is the main ocular sign in cats. With respect to dogs, GM1-gangliosidosis
is an autosomal recessive condition seen in Alaskan

K22463_C019.indd 875

875

Huskies, English Springer Spaniels, mixed b
­ reed-­Beagles,
Portugese Water Dogs, and Shiba Inus. Abnormal
­ocular findings in dogs with this disease are limited to:
(1) central corneal clouding, as has been observed in Shiba
Inus and Portugese Water Dogs; (2) vision ­disturbances,
as seen in Shiba Inus and Portugese Water Dogs;
(3) strabismus, as has been observed in mixed
­breed-­Beagles and Huskies; and (4) nystagmus, as has
been observed in English Springer Spaniels, Portugese
Water Dogs, and Huskies.

GM2-GANGLIOSIDOSIS
Definition/overview
GM2-gangliosidosis is caused by a deficiency of
hexosaminidase. Clinical signs include ataxia, immobility, blindness, and dysphagia and finally seizures or
generalized myoclonus (5 months of age), quadriplegia
(6 months of age), and death prior to 8 months of age
in cats. Variant forms of GM-2 gangliosidosis have been
reported in the Japanese Spaniel, the German Shorthair
Pointer, and the Golden Retriever.

MUCOLIPIDOSIS II
Definition/overview
Mucolipidosis II, or inclusion cell disease, is caused by
deficient activity of the enzyme N-acetylglucosamine1-phosphotransferase. Ocular abnormalities detected in
cats affected with mucolipidosis II include, from early to
late lesions, absent menace response, diminished pupillary light reflexes, and dilated pupils by 4 months of
age. Initially, retinal development appears normal until
2.5 months of age, at which time dorsal retinal degeneration develops followed by progressive end-stage generalized retinal degeneration and blindness by 3.5 months
of age.

MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSES
Definition/overview
The mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) are a group of diseases characterized by defective metabolism of mucopolysaccharides (glycosaminoglycans). Three types of MPS
have been identified in cats (MPS I, VI, and VII). Corneal
clouding is the most debilitating ocular manifestation.

26/04/16 1:03 am

876

Diseases of specific organ systems

Five types of MPS have been identified in dogs (MPS I, II,
III, VI, and VII). Corneal opacities are also seen with these
conditions in dogs.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Aroch, I, Ofri R, Sutton GA (2013) Ocular manifestations of
systemic diseases. In: Slatter’s Fundamentals of Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 5th edn. (eds. DJ Maggs, PE Miller, R Ofri R)
Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 394–436.

K22463_C019.indd 876

Cullen CL, Webb AA (2013) Ocular manifestations of systemic
disease. Part 1: the dog. In: Veterinary Ophthalmology,
5th edn. (ed. KN Gelatt) John Wiley and Sons, Ames,
pp. 1897–1977.
Cullen CL, Webb AA (2013) Ocular manifestations of systemic
disease. Part 2: the cat. In: Veterinary Ophthalmology,
5th edn. (ed. KN Gelatt) John Wiley and Sons, Ames,
pp. 1978–2036.
Martin CL (2010) Ophthalmic Disease in Veterinary Medicine.
Manson Publishing, London.

26/04/16 1:25 am

877

Part 3
Multisystemic disorders

K22463_C020.indd 877

Chapter 20

Clinical toxicology
Lisa A. Murphy & Kenneth J. Drobatz

Chapter 21

Infectious diseases
Richard B. Ford & Annette Litster

Chapter 22

Immunologic disorders
Michael J. Day

25/04/16 11:27 pm

This page intentionally left blank

879

Chapter 20
Clinical toxicology
Lisa A. Murphy & Kenneth J. Drobatz

INTRODUCTION
Animals can come into contact with an endless variety
and type of toxins. This chapter contains some of the more
common toxins reported in veterinary medicine and also
some of the not-so-common toxins. Relatively speaking,
toxins are less common than spontaneous diseases, but a
toxin should always be considered in any sick or abnormally behaving animal. The chapter is broken down into
seven major categories of toxins: insecticides, rodenticides, plants, over-the-counter medications, household
products, metals, and human foods. Each toxin is consistently broken down into common names (if applicable),
source, type of toxin, a brief synopsis of the pathophysiology of the toxin, clinical signs, differential diagnosis,
basis of a diagnosis of the toxin, and finally clinical management of the toxicity. The authors have purposely kept
the discussion concise, clinically relevant, and easy to use.

INSECTICIDES

Pathophysiology
The stimulatory neurotransmitter acetylcholine acts at
cholinergic nerve synapses and neuromuscular junctions.
Normally, acetylcholine is catabolized by acetylcholinesterase or other cholinesterases (ChE). OP and carbamate
insecticides directly bind and inhibit ChE (Figure 20.1).
Toxicity is the result of postsynaptic overstimulation due
to the accumulation of acetylcholine.

Clinical signs
There are two clinical syndromes of OP intoxication: an
acute syndrome and an intermediate syndrome. The
acute syndrome is much more common.

Acute syndrome
Clinical signs of acute syndrome can be grouped into
three categories: muscarinic, nicotinic, and central nervous system (CNS) signs:

●● The traditional mnemonic that has been used to iden-

Type of toxin

tify the acute muscarinic signs is SLUD (Salivation,
Lacrimation, Urination, Defecation), which reflects
stimulation of the parasympathetic nervous system.
A more complete mnemonic is DUMBELS (Diarrhea,
Urination, Miosis, Bronchospasm/Bradycardia, Emesis,
Lacrimation, and Salivation). Other muscarinic signs
include anorexia, coughing, difficulty breathing, and
abdominal pain. Stimulation of the parasympathetic
nervous system can be modified by concurrent stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system, resulting
in sympathetic signs such as mydriasis or tachycardia, but this is less common.
●● Nicotinic signs include generalized muscle stiffness,
tremors, or weakness/paralysis (Figures 20.2, 20.3).
●● CNS signs include restlessness, hyperactivity, depression, coma, and/or seizures (Figure 20.4).

OP and carbamate insecticides interfere with the normal breakdown of acetylcholine at cholinergic receptor
sites.

Not all signs will be present in every case. The onset of
signs from exposure varies depending on the dose, route

ANTICHOLINESTERASE INSECTICIDES
Common names
Common organophosphates (OPs) include disulfoton,
terbufos, chlorpyrifos, fenthion, diazinon, and malathion. Common carbamates include aldicarb, carbofuran,
methomyl, propoxur, and carbaryl.

Source
OP and carbamate insecticides are commonly used on
plants, animals, and soil, and in and around the home
for insect control. Products are typically formulated as
sprays, powders, and granules.

K22463_C020.indd 879

25/04/16 11:27 pm

880

Multisystemic disorders

20.1

20.2

Cholinergic neuron

ACH

20.3
Choline

ACH

ACE

Figures 20.2, 20.3 One minute this kitten (20.2) was walking
around normally with minimal muscular exertion, the next it
was showing signs of muscular fatigue (20.3). This was due to
chronic organophosphate intoxication. (Courtesy M. Schaer)
Postsynaptic
tissue

20.4

Figure 20.1 Normally, acetylcholine (ACH) is catabolized by
acetylcholinesterase (ACE) at the myoneural junction. When
the enzyme is inhibited, the parasympathomimetic signs
from acetylcholine excess cause the characteristic muscarinic
and nicotinic signs of organophosphate intoxication.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

of exposure, and the formulation of the toxin. It can range
from minutes to hours.

Intermediate syndrome
Intermediate syndrome may occur with or without the
acute syndrome and is thought to occur as a result of
downregulation of the cholinergic receptors. It has been
recognized in dogs and cats and clinical signs include
loss of appetite, diarrhea, weakness (Figure 20.5), muscle tremors, altered behavior, abnormal posture, mental

K22463_C020.indd 880

Figure 20.4 This puppy is seizuring from the nicotinic effects of
acute organophosphate intoxication. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

depression, and even death. These signs may occur days
after the exposure.

Differential diagnosis
Any condition that can result in tremors, tonic/clonic seizures, or vomiting, or gastrointestinal (GI) signs of vomiting and diarrhea, should be considered. The combination
of GI signs with the neurologic signs makes acetylcholinesterase inhibition highly likely.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

Clinical toxicology

20.5

881

There is no way to ­predict if irreversible binding has
occurred, so 2-PAM should be given to see if clinical signs
improve. If they do not, then it is unlikely that 2-PAM will
be helpful.

Nonspecific therapy
Nicotinic signs (muscle tremors) and CNS signs (seizures)
can be treated with diazepam (0.05–1.0 mg/kg IV).
Figure 20.5 This Poodle is very weak and moribund from
chronic organophosphate intoxication. A history of exposure
to the poison would be vital for an expedient diagnosis for this
dog. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Diagnosis

FIPRONIL
Common names
Trade names for fipronil-containing products include
Combat, Frontline, Maxforce, and Termidor.

History of exposure with compatible clinical signs is adequate for a working diagnosis and warrants therapy for
acetylcholinesterase inhibition. Response to treatment can
be supportive of a diagnosis. Measuring acetylcholinesterase activity in heparinized whole blood allows for a premortem diagnosis. Fresh whole blood is best or refrigerated
heparinized whole blood if analysis is delayed. Depressed
activity may occur with anemia. Activity <50% of normal is
suspicious of intoxication, while activity <25% is diagnostic.
Stomach contents, vomited material, or samples of
the suspected material that was ingested may also be
assessed for the actual toxin.
Carbamate binding of acetylcholinesterase is reversible and this may occur in stored blood, resulting in a
false-negative result. Keeping the blood sample refrigerated will help minimize this problem.

Source

Management

Clinical signs

If ingestion is recent, decontamination procedures (e.g.
emesis induction, activated charcoal/cathartic, bath)
should be done.

Relatively rare and most are mild. Topical hypersensitivity skin reactions are the most commonly reported
adverse effects. Hypersalivation or vomiting may occur.

Specific therapy

Differential diagnosis

Atropine sulfate (0.1–0.5 mg/kg: give 1/4 of the dose IV
and the rest SC). Most clinicians start with 0.2 mg/kg slow
IV and give the higher dose to animals with more severe
muscarinic signs. Repeat doses are usually lower and can
be titrated based on heart rate, pupil size, and amount of
salivation. Over-atropinization should be avoided.
Protopam chloride or pralidoxime chloride (2-PAM)
(10–20 mg/kg very slowly IV, or may be given IM or SC
q8–12h) can reverse the binding of the OP to the acetylcholinesterase (carbamates have reversible binding and
this therapy is not necessary). 2-PAM may not be effective if ‘aging’ has occurred. The longer OPs are bound to
acetylcholinesterase, the more irreversible is the binding.

Local skin hypersensitivity reaction.

K22463_C020.indd 881

Fipronil is approved for use on dogs and cats for flea and
tick control. Other common uses include insect control in
the home and on crops and golf courses. Available fipronil
formulations include spot-ons, sprays, gels, and granular
products.

Type of toxin
Fipronil is a phenylpyrazole insecticide.

Pathophysiology
Fipronil appears to act as a noncompetitive blocker of
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). This blockade causes
neural excitement and death in insects. Because the
shape of mammalian and insect GABA receptors is different, fipronil is much less toxic in mammals.

Diagnosis
Analysis of hair and skin where drug is applied can confirm exposure. Skin reaction at the site of application is
suggestive of hypersensitivity to fipronil.

Management
No specific antidote exists. Treatment is symptomatic and
supportive. Bathe the dermal exposure area with mild
dishwashing detergent. Symptomatic treatment for skin
hypersensitivity reactions includes bathing with a pet
shampoo +/– corticosteroids or antihistamines.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

882

Multisystemic disorders

IMIDACLOPRID

Type of toxin

Common names
Trade names include Advantage, Marathon, and Premise.

Selamectin is a semisynthetic avermectin derived from a
precursor avermectin produced by a bioengineered strain
of Streptomyces avermitilis.

Source

Pathophysiology

In addition to its agricultural uses, imidacloprid is used
around the home for termites and on dogs and cats for
flea control. Available formulations include powders,
granules, sprays, and spot-on products.

Selamectin causes paralysis in target organisms due to
increased permeability of neuronal chloride channels.
Rapid influx of chloride ions into neurons results in
­flaccid paralysis. Mammalian chloride channels are less
sensitive and less accessible to selamectin.

Type of toxin
Imidacloprid is a chloronicotinyl nitroguanide insecticide.

Pathophysiology
Imidacloprid causes insect death by competitively blocking nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, resulting in a blockade of normal impulse transmission. Imidacloprid is not
degraded by acetylcholinesterase. Imidacloprid is useful
for the control of fleas and other insects, but is not active
against ticks.

Clinical signs
Relatively rare and if present tend to be mild.
Hypersalivation or vomiting may occur. Nicotinic signs
such as muscle tremors, twitching, weakness, or cramps
would be expected if toxicity occurs. A local skin hypersensitivity reaction also occurs.

Differential diagnosis
Clinical signs of toxicity are quite rare. If nicotinic signs
are present, electrolyte changes (hypocalcemia) or toxins
that cause muscle tremors should be considered.

Diagnosis
History of exposure and compatible clinical signs.

Management
Dermal exposure can be treated by bathing the toxin
exposed area with a mild dishwashing detergent. The
clinical signs of ingestion of the topically applied product
(hypersalivation, vomiting) can be treated by administering a diluent such as milk or water.

SELAMECTIN
Source
Selamectin is marketed as Revolution® for use against
fleas, ticks, heartworms, and mites in dogs, and fleas,
heartworms, mites, hookworms, and roundworms in cats.

K22463_C020.indd 882

Clinical signs
Clinical signs are relatively rare. A reversible, localized
alopecia has been reported in cats. Other signs include
disorientation, lethargy, anorexia, hypersalivation,
­vomiting, diarrhea, muscle tremors, pruritus/urticaria,
erythema, and tachypnea. Rarely, seizures and ataxia
occur in dogs. Severely affected dogs may become progressively weaker and comatose.

Differential diagnosis
If there are CNS/neurologic signs, other toxins, metabolic abnormalities (e.g. hypocalcemia, hypoglycemia,
­hypernatremia, hyponatremia, hepatic encephalopathy),
or primary brain disease (encephalitis, neoplasia) should
be considered.

Diagnosis
Detection of selamectin in the blood or tissues such as
liver or adipose tissue will indicate exposure. Ideally,
brain concentration of selamectin is what should
be ­
measured, but this is not possible antemortem.
Compatible clinical signs with recent exposure can support a diagnosis. Dogs that lack P-glycoprotein in the
blood–brain barrier have greater susceptibility to toxicity (e.g. Collies, other herding breeds). Dogs receiving drugs that inhibit P-glycoprotein may be more
susceptible to toxicity: ketoconazole, cyclosporine A,
verapamil.

Management
No specific antidote exists. Decontamination for oral
ingestion within 2–3 hours (emesis induction, activated
charcoal, cathartic). Treatment is primarily supportive:
IV fluids, nutrition, and good nursing care for animals
that are recumbent and not responsive. Close monitoring of ventilation should be provided in comatose
patients. Full recovery can occur despite the severity of
the signs.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

Clinical toxicology

IVERMECTIN
Source
A semi-synthetic macrocytic lactone derived from
Streptomyces avermitilis. It is an antiparasitic drug that is
effective against a broad spectrum of external and internal parasites of both large and small animals.

Type of toxin
Avermectins function by potentiating glutamate-gated
chloride channels and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)gated chloride channels in the nervous system.

Pathophysiology
The actions on the gated chloride channels lead to nerve
dysfunction and the clinical signs in intoxicated animals.
The enhanced release of GABA at presynaptic nerve terminals blocks postsynaptic stimulation of adjacent neurons by acting as an inhibitory neurotransmitter, which
causes paralysis and eventual death of the parasite.
Unfortunately, these same effects can occur in animals that
become intoxicated with this agent. Major adverse signs
are seen in Collie dogs and other dogs in the sheepdog
group because they have a deletion mutation in the multidrug resistance (mdr1) gene, thus allowing for sustained
neurologic impairment that can culminate in death.

Clinical signs
The clinical signs are mainly neurologic, which can cause
the patient to have a multitude of neurologic abnormalities. These signs include blindness, dementia, seizures,
and ventilatory impairment. The clinical signs can last
for several days, but in the sheepdog breeds they can
last for weeks, with some dogs requiring ventilator support for 2 or more weeks.

Differential diagnosis
Any disease, injury, drug, or toxin that can adversely
affect the CNS.

Diagnosis
The history is of utmost importance because it will reveal
the animal’s access to the parasitide. Dog owners might
provide information of giving their horse’s ivermectin
formulation to their pet or the dogs might have been in
the same area where horses were recently dewormed
with the agent, thus providing a means of ingesting the
ivermectin from amounts that are spilt onto the ground
or remnants of the drug that come out in the feces, which
are subsequently ingested by the dog.

K22463_C020.indd 883

883

Treatment
Treatment is generally supportive, using IV crystalloid
for systemic support and anticonvulsants as indicated. If
the animal was observed to ingest the ivermectin, rapid
induction of vomiting using apomorphine might be very
helpful followed by several doses of orally administered
activated charcoal.
The use of IV lipid emulsions is theoretically effective because of the high lipid solubility of avermectins.
The high lipid solubility is the main reason for the
drug’s long action in cases of intoxication because it is
stored in the fat tissue and then slowly released into the
­circulation. By giving the lipid emulsion IV (Intralipid®
20% [A 20% IV fat emulsion], Baxter Healthcare Corp.)
a ‘lipid sink’ is theoretically created and the drug will
become partitioned into a lipid compartment in the blood
stream. The recommended dose is 4.0 ml/kg as a bolus
IV, followed by a maintenance rate of 3.0 ml/kg/hour
for 4 hours.
The IV lipid emulsion has also been used to treat permethrin intoxication.

LUFENURON
Source
Lufenuron is commonly used to control fleas on pets and
on field crops. It has also been used to treat cutaneous
fungal infections in dogs and cats.

Type of toxin
Lufenuron is a benzophenyl urea insect development
inhibitor.

Pathophysiology
The drug does not affect adult fleas, but is ovicidal and
larvicidal. Lufenuron blocks chitin synthetase, disrupting
the synthesis and deposition of chitin.

Clinical signs
Extremely rare. Vomiting, lethargy/depression, pruritus/
urticaria, diarrhea, dyspnea, anorexia, and reddened skin
are reported clinical signs.

Differential diagnosis
Skin hypersensitivity reaction. Any potential causes for
vomiting/diarrhea.

Diagnosis
Exposure with compatible clinical signs is supportive.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

884

Multisystemic disorders

Management

Clinical signs

Decontamination for oral ingestion within 2–3 hours
(emesis induction, activated charcoal, cathartic).
Supportive care.

Hypersalivation, vomiting, hyperexcitability, muscle
tremors, ataxia, and seizures.

NITENPYRAM

For CNS signs consider neoplasia, trauma, infection,
metabolic disturbances (e.g. hypoglycemia, sodium
concentration disorders, hepatic encephalopathy) or
congenital neurologic disorders. Other possible toxins include lead, metaldehyde, acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors, mycotoxins, or macrolide antiparasitic
­
products.

Source
Nitenpyram was developed for use against fleas as an
oral adulticide.

Type of toxin
Nitenpyram is a neonicotinoid, systemically active drug.

Pathophysiology
Nitenpyram is a nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonist that is insect specific. It does not inhibit
acetylcholinesterase.

Clinical signs
Nitenpyram is extremely safe and toxicity is very rare. As
fleas die the animal may become pruritic, but this is not
considered to be toxicity.

Differential diagnosis
Not applicable as toxicity is very rare.

Diagnosis

Differential diagnosis

Diagnosis
Blood, urine, tissue, or stomach content concentrations of
DEET indicate exposure. Exposure with compatible clinical signs is suggestive of toxicity.

Management
Treatment is supportive as there is no antidote for DEET
intoxication. Rinse the animal with soap and water vigorously if a topical preparation was used. If the DEET has
been ingested, vomiting should be induced followed by
oral activated charcoal once the vomiting has ceased.
IV crystalloid fluid support is highly recommended.
Anticonvulsants (diazepam, midazolam) should be given
if seizures ensue. Ventilation and oxygen support should
be provided if indicated.

Recent exposure with compatible clinical signs.

Management

PYRETHRINS/PYRETHROIDS

Decontamination of the GI tract if exposure is recent
(within 3 hours) followed by activated charcoal and a
cathartic. Supportive care.

Source

N,N-DIETHYL-M-TOLUAMIDE
Common names
N,N-Diethyl-M-toluamide (DEET) is the active ingredient
in products such as Cutters and Deep Woods Off.

Source
DEET is an insect repellent marketed for mosquito, fly,
and tick control on pets, clothing, and humans. Available
formulations include sprays, creams, lotions, sticks, and
gels, ranging in DEET concentration from 5% to 100%.

Pathophysiology
The toxicologic mechanisms of action of DEET have not
been well described.

K22463_C020.indd 884

Products containing pyrethrins and pyrethroids are
widely available, marketed under a vast number of
trade names, for flea and tick control in cats and dogs.
Formulations include dips, sprays, spot-ons, shampoos,
and mousses.

Type of toxin
Natural pyrethrum extract is derived from Chrysanthemum
cinerariaefolium and related plants. Pyrethroids are synthetic products, formulated to provide enhanced stability
and potency.

Pathophysiology
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids affect neuronal sodium ion
channels. By increasing the length of depolarizing action
potentials, these compounds cause repetitive nerve firing. Sensory nerve fibers are especially susceptible to
stimulation.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

Clinical toxicology

Clinical signs
Much more common in cats compared with dogs. Often
results from inappropriate use of a cat product or
applying canine formulation to a cat. Hypersalivation,
tremors, ear and facial twitching, ataxia, pruritus, vomiting, and agitation are the most common clinical signs.
Muscle tremors can be severe and appear as if the animal is seizuring, but the majority are alert and aware of
their surroundings during these seizure-like episodes
(Figure 20.6). Allergic reactions manifested by pruritus
and hyperemia have been reported.

Differential diagnosis
Other neurotoxins such as metaldehyde, caffeine, theobromine, illicit drugs (amphetamines, cocaine), mycotoxins, acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, and carbamates.
Also trauma, metabolic disturbances (e.g. hypoglycemia,
sodium disorders, hypocalcemia, hepatic encephalopathy), neoplasia, infections, inflammatory brain lesions.

Diagnosis
Compatible clinical signs after recent exposure are adequate for a working clinical diagnosis. Analysis of hair
can confirm exposure, but is generally not necessary.

Management
Decontamination of skin by bathing animal. If topical formulation is ingested by a cat, then GI decontamination
and administration of activated charcoal is warranted.
Muscle tremor control is best achieved by administration
of methocarbamol (55–220 mg/kg slow IV bolus). Doses may
be repeated as needed to control tremors, but the total dose
20.6

885

should not exceed 330 mg/kg/day. (Note: Anecdotally, total
doses greater than this have been administered in severe
or protracted cases without obvious adverse clinical signs.)
Diazepam (0.5–5.0 mg/kg IV, titrating to effect) may also be
used to control tremors. Supportive care.

METALDEHYDE
Source
Snail and slug baits available under various trade names
as pellets, granules, liquids, or powders contain metaldehyde. In some countries, metaldehyde is also sold as solid
or pelletized fuel for camping stoves and lamps.

Type of toxin
Metaldehyde is a tetramer of acetaldehyde.

Pathophysiology
Acid hydrolysis of metaldehyde in the stomach results in
the formation of acetaldehyde, but acetaldehyde residues
were not detected in the serum of orally exposed rats.
Metaldehyde is absorbed intact from the GI tract, but once
absorbed, its metabolic fate is largely unknown. Studies
in mice have shown a significant decrease in GABA concentrations in the brain. Monoamine oxidases, norepinephrine, and 5-hydroxytryptamine may also contribute
to the effects of metaldehyde.

Clinical signs
Seizures, muscle tremors, tachycardia, hyperthermia,
mydriasis, hypersalivation, ataxia, panting, severe
depression, coma, and death due to respiratory failure.

Differential diagnosis
Other toxins that affect the nervous system including
strychnine, bromethalin, acetylcholinesterase inhibitors,
pyrethrins/pyrethroids, and mycotoxins. Metabolic conditions such as hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, or hepatic
encephalopathy. CNS trauma, neoplasia, infection,
encephalitis, or congenital disorders.

Diagnosis
Chemical analysis of serum, stomach contents, vomitus, urine, or liver tissue. Analysis of material that was
ingested. Exposure with compatible clinical signs is the
basis of most working clinical diagnoses.

Management
Figure 20.6 This cat has neurologic signs from pyrethroid
intoxication. It showed signs of neuromuscular twitching and a
variable degree of altered consciousness. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C020.indd 885

GI decontamination procedures (emesis, gastric lavage,
cleansing enemas followed by activated charcoal and
a cathartic) should be applied appropriately. Fluid

25/04/16 11:27 pm

886

Multisystemic disorders

therapy will help control increased body temperature
and ­
maintain hydration in severely affected cases.
Methocarbamol (55–220 mg/kg slow IV bolus) can be
given to control tremors. (Note: According to the manufacturer the daily dose should not exceed 330 mg/kg, but
anecdotally this dose has been exceeded in severe cases
without obvious adverse clinical effects.) Most animals
respond well to methocarbamol. Diazepam (0.5–5 mg/kg
IV, titrated to effect) can be given to control tremors/­
seizures. If the seizures are not controlled with methocarbamol or diazepam, pentobarbital (2–4 mg/kg slow
boluses to effect [to control tremors, not to anesthetize if
­possible]) should be considered. Propofol administered
by CRI can be given instead of pentobarbital. When
administering a combination of sedatives, make sure the
airway is protected and ventilation is adequate.

20.7

Figure 20.7 This radiograph shows intrapulmonary
hemorrhage along with bleeding into the wall of the trachea,
which caused luminal attenuation. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

RODENTICIDES
ANTICOAGULANT RODENTICIDES

20.8

(See also Chapter 17: Disorders of hemostasis.)

Common examples
Warfarin, chlorphacinone, bromadiolone, brodifacoum.

Source
Anticoagulant rodenticides are the most common type
of rodenticides designed to kill rats, mice, gophers, and
other rodents. These products are readily available as pellets, wax blocks, and tracking powders. These baits may
then be mixed with foodstuffs, inadvertently attracting
pets instead.

Type of toxin

20.9

Anticoagulant rodenticides cause coagulopathies by
depleting vitamin K1 hydroquinone.

Pathophysiology
Vitamin K1 hydroquinone is converted to vitamin K1 epoxide during the synthesis of clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X.
Vitamin K1 epoxide is then converted back to vitamin K1
quinone. Anticoagulant rodenticides stop the ‘recycling’ of
vitamin K1 by inhibiting vitamin K1(2,3)-epoxide reductase.

Clinical signs
Vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, generalized weakness,
respiratory distress, bleeding (can be from anywhere)
(Figures 20.7–20.12), pale mucous membranes, altered
mentation/seizures (if bleeding into brain occurs, but this
is extremely rare; Figure 20.13).

K22463_C020.indd 886

Figures 20.8, 20.9 This Cocker Spaniel shows marked
conjunctival hemorrhage as its only bleeding site from warfarin
intoxication. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 11:27 pm

Clinical toxicology

20.10

887

20.11

Figure 20.10 Ecchymotic hemorrhages caused by
anticoagulant rodenticide ingestion are shown in this dog.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

Differential diagnosis
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (typically these
animals are systemically ill as well), congenital bleeding disorders, thrombocytopenia, or severe liver disease
(usually other signs of liver disease are present once the
coagulation factors are not being produced).

20.12

Diagnosis
History of exposure with compatible clinical signs is adequate for a working diagnosis. Analysis of blood for anticoagulant rodenticides is definitive.

Management
Recent exposure (within hours of ingestion)
Induce emesis. Administer activated charcoal with a
cathartic. There are two further options to choose from:

●● Administer vitamin K1 (2.5 mg/kg PO q12h) empirically for 4 weeks (if given with higher-fat food,
will enhance absorption, but this is not necessary).
Recheck prothrombin time (PT) 48–72 hours after
final dose of vitamin K1. If PT is prolonged, administer vitamin K1 for 2 further weeks and follow same
PT recheck procedure. For very large dogs, vitamin K1
can be expensive.
●● Do not administer vitamin K1. Check PT 48 hours
after exposure. If PT is within reference range, then
it is unlikely that the animal ingested a toxic amount
of the rodenticide and no further therapy is necessary. If PT is prolonged, begin vitamin K1 therapy as
indicated above in the empirical vitamin K1 therapy
protocol.

K22463_C020.indd 887

Figures 20.11, 20.12 These radiographs show marked
pulmonary and pleural hemorrhage caused by 2nd generation
anticoagulant rodenticide ingestion. The effusion will require
approximately 5–7 days to resolve (Courtesy M. Schaer)

If animal is actively bleeding
Bleeding can occur anywhere in the body, but it is most
commonly noted in the pleural space and lung parenchyma. Perform PT and partial thromboplastin time to

25/04/16 11:27 pm

888

Multisystemic disorders

20.13

Clinical signs
Most clinical signs are associated with the CNS. Signs will
vary depending on time of exposure to presentation and
dose. Onset and progression of clinical signs will vary
from hours to days, with higher dose exposures requiring a shorter time period for onset of signs. Clinical signs
include hindlimb ataxia/paresis that can progress to
hindlimb paralysis. Other CNS signs can include anisocoria, behavioral changes, positional nystagmus, loss of
bark, muscle tremors, focal motor to generalized seizures,
and even stupor or coma. Abdominal distension secondary to generalized ileus has been noted in cats.

Figure 20.13 This German Shepherd Dog suffered severe
brainstem hemorrhage from anticoagulant rodenticide
poisoning and died. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

confirm coagulopathy. Administer 10–20 ml/kg of fresh
frozen plasma IV. (Note: All venepuncture sites can form
large hematomas; therefore, avoid the jugular veins.) If
fresh frozen plasma is not available, consider fresh whole
blood. If anemic, also administer packed red blood cells
(RBCs) or fresh whole blood. Administer 5 mg/kg vitamin K1
SC using a small needle or administer 5 mg/kg vitamin K1
PO if tissue perfusion is good. If tissue perfusion is poor,
GI absorption may be inadequate. Do not administer
­vitamin K1 IM as a severe hematoma may develop. Avoid
administration IV as an anaphylactoid type reaction may
occur.
It takes about 12–24 hours for vitamin K1 to have its
effect on coagulation. Once the animal is stable and coagulation parameters are corrected, discharge the animal
with vitamin K1 therapy as indicated in the empirical
vitamin K1 administration protocol above.

BROMETHALIN
Source
Bromethalin has been in use as a rodenticide since the
1980s.

Type of toxin
Bromethalin and its primary metabolite, desmethylbromethalin, are uncouplers of oxidative phosphorylation.

Pathophysiology
Uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation decreases ion
channel pump activity; bromethalin has also been shown
to induce lipid peroxidation in the brains of rats. Cerebral
edema and increased cerebrospinal fluid pressures are
seen in lethally poisoned animals.

K22463_C020.indd 888

Differential diagnosis
Any condition that causes CNS signs including head
trauma, neoplasia, intracranial hemorrhage or embolism, infections, inflammatory conditions, and other CNS
toxins.

Diagnosis
Primarily based on history of exposure and compatible
clinical signs. Chemical confirmation from adipose tissue, brain, liver, kidney, and other tissues is definitive for
exposure and diagnostic in the face of compatible clinical
signs.

Management
This is a deadly toxin and aggressive decontamination
should be applied in cases of recent exposure. Emesis
should be induced (exposure within 2–3 hours) as soon
as possible in animals that do not have contraindications
for this procedure (e.g. altered mentation, seizures, respiratory difficulty, upper airway disease).
If emesis is contraindicated, gastric lavage should
be performed. Oral activated charcoal combined with
a cathartic should be given following emesis induction.
Sorbitol or sodium sulfate are appropriate cathartics.
Magnesium sulfate should be avoided in animals with
renal disease or animals with CNS depression, which often
occurs with bromethalin intoxication (increased brain
magnesium levels may contribute to the CNS depression). Bromethalin is excreted into the GI tract and goes
through enterohepatic recirculation; therefore, repeated
doses of activated charcoal with a cathartic should be
given every 4–6 hours. Hydration should be monitored as
repeated doses of a cathartic can result in dehydration.
If CNS signs are evident, mannitol (0.5–1.0 g/kg slow IV)
should be administered. Furosemide (1–2 mg/kg IV q6h)
and high doses of dexamethasone (2 mg/kg IV) have been
recommended. These treatments have met with limited

25/04/16 11:27 pm

Clinical toxicology

success in treating animals that develop CNS signs after
bromethalin ingestion.

CHOLECALCIFEROL
Common names
Rodenticides containing cholecalciferol include Quintox®.

Source
Cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) can be found in rodenticides
and multivitamins.

Type of toxin
With normal dietary intakes, cholecalciferol is converted
to various metabolites that are eventually eliminated, primarily through the bile and feces. After massive intakes,
excessive concentrations of cholecalciferol metabolites
exert metabolic effects.

Pathophysiology
The active cholecalciferol metabolites calcifediol and calcitriol produce hypercalcemia and hyperphosphatemia
through two mechanisms: (1) increasing calcium and
phosphorus absorption from the intestines and (2) stimulating calcium and phosphorus release from bone. Once
the plasma calcium × phosphorus product is greater than
60, soft tissue mineralization may occur.

Clinical signs
Anecdotally, the frequency of toxicity associated with
this poison is decreasing. Clinical signs are related
to hypercalcemia and include lethargy/depression,
anorexia, ­
weakness, vomiting (occasionally hematemesis), ­
polydipsia/polyuria, constipation, melena, and
dehydration.

Differential diagnosis
Any disease that causes hypercalcemia should be
considered.

Diagnosis
Hypercalcemia with recent exposure is adequate for
a working diagnosis. More supportive but not exclusively diagnostic evidence includes measuring the variables associated with calcium metabolism (i.e. serum
intact p
­arathyroid hormone [PTH], ionized ­
calcium,
25-hydroxyvitamin D3, and 1,­25-dihydroxyvitamin D3).
With cholecalciferol intoxication PTH is decreased,
25-hydroxyvitamin D3 is increased, and 1,25­dihydroxyvitamin D3 is normal.

K22463_C020.indd 889

889

Management
GI decontamination followed by activated charcoal and
a saline cathartic should be carried out if ingestion was
within the last 6–8 hours. Blood calcium concentration
should be monitored every 24 hours for several days
after exposure (between 2 and 6 days). If hypercalcemia
is already present, GI decontamination is not necessary
unless the animal was recently exposed to more toxin
based on the owner’s history.
Treatment for hypercalcemia should be administered
at presentation. This can include:

●● Saline diuresis.
●● Furosemide (2–6 mg/kg IV in the dog or 1–4 mg/kg in
the cat q8–12h).

●● Prednisolone (2 mg/kg PO q12h). (Note: Make sure
neoplastic causes of hypercalcemia have been ruled
out.)
●● Salmon calcitonin (4–6 IU/kg SC q6h) until calcium
stabilizes.
●● Pamidronate disodium (1.3–2 mg/kg slow IV over
2–4 hours, given two times 4 days apart) has been
shown to be effective in controlling experimentally
induced cholecalciferol intoxication in dogs. (Note:
Pamidronate disodium and salmon calcitonin should
not be administered concurrently.)
●● Dietary calcium restriction.
Treatment is continued at home once the serum calcium
concentration is stabilized. Oral furosemide and prednisolone in conjunction with a low-calcium diet may be
necessary for weeks with some cholecalciferol ingestions.
Calcium concentrations are monitored to determine
when therapy can be discontinued.

STRYCHNINE
Source
Often considered restricted-use pesticides, strychnine
baits are used to control many nuisance animal species.
Pet animals may be exposed accidentally or maliciously.

Type of toxin
Strychnine is an alkaloid isolated from the seeds of
Strychnos nux-vomica and Strychnos ignatii.

Pathophysiology
Strychnine blocks the inhibitory actions of glycine, leading to excessive neuronal stimulation with highly exaggerated reflex arcs.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

890

Multisystemic disorders

Clinical signs
Clinical signs are primarily referable to lack of inhibition
of muscle reflexes resulting in extensor muscle spasms
and tetany. The speed of onset and severity of clinical signs
are proportional to the amount of toxin ingested. Larger
amounts result in faster onset of signs (usually within
minutes to an hour). Earliest signs include nervousness,
anxiety, tachypnea, and hypersalivation. Ataxia, muscle spasms, and stiffness followed by generalized convulsions are characterized primarily by ­tonic extensor
muscle spasms (opisthotonus). The severity of the muscle contractions may be increased with noise stimulation.
Death can result from respiratory paralysis.

supportive care (IV fluids, control temperature, monitor
acid–base status, good nursing care).

ZINC PHOSPHIDE
Common names
Brand names for zinc phosphide include Sweeney’s Poison
Peanuts, Mole Guard, and ZP Tracking Powder.

Source
Zinc phosphide is a dark gray powder that has been formulated into various rodenticide pellets, baits, and tracking powders.

Differential diagnosis

Type of toxin

Any toxin or disorder that can result in CNS signs primarily characterized by tonic muscle spasms (e.g. metaldehyde, penitrem A [moldy food], theobromine, nicotine,
caffeine, amphetamines, cocaine, chlorinated hydrocarbons), tetanus, hypocalcemia.

Under acidic conditions or in the presence of water, zinc
phosphide is rapidly converted to highly toxic phosphine
gas. The odor of phosphine gas has been described as rotten fish or rotten eggs.

Diagnosis

Phosphine gas inhibits oxidative phosphorylation and
also causes lipid peroxidation and other cellular damage.

Exposure with compatible clinical signs is adequate for a
working diagnosis. Analysis for the toxin in vomitus or
gastric lavage contents is necessary to confirm ingestion/
exposure. Analysis of the substance that was ingested
confirms exposure. Strychnine can sometimes be detected
in urine and blood.

Management
The GI tract must be decontaminated (induce emesis or gastric lavage) if exposure was recent and the animal does not
have clinical signs associated with strychnine ingestion.
Decontamination is followed with activated charcoal and a
cathartic. The convulsions should be controlled:

●● Pentobarbital (3–15 mg/kg to effect, but give very
slowly IV as full effect of each dose is delayed by a
few minutes).
●● Diazepam (0.5–5 mg/kg IV to effect). If this is effective,
it can be followed by a CRI (usually start with the dose
that controlled the convulsions at that rate/hour). The
dose is adjusted as needed to control muscle spasms.
●● Methocarbamol (55–220 mg/kg slow IV bolus).
Generally, do not exceed 330 mg/kg/day. Anecdotally,
this dose has been exceeded without obvious clinical
problems.
Ventilation should be monitored. If ventilation is inadequate, positive pressure mechanical ventilation should be
administered. Minimize any sensory stimulation. Provide

K22463_C020.indd 890

Pathophysiology

Clinical signs
Onset of vomiting occurs within 15 minutes to 1 hour after
ingestion. Other signs include depression, anorexia, and
hematemesis. The vomitus can smell like rotten fish or
be garlicky, which indicates phosphine gas (use caution).
Due to the rapid corrosive effect of the toxin, the animal
may have acute abdominal pain. Respiratory signs include
respiratory distress with harsh sounds. Neurologic signs
include vocalization, convulsions, generalized muscle fasciculations, tremors, exaggerated response to stimuli, and
disorientation. Tachycardia or bradycardia may be noted.
Abdominal pain can result in irritability and agitation.

Differential diagnosis
●● GI signs. Gastric ulcer, GI foreign body, pancreatitis,
intussusception, gastritis, peritonitis, or any systemic
disease that can result in vomiting.
●● Respiratory signs. Congestive heart failure, pneumonia, pulmonary thromboembolism, pulmonary
hemorrhage, neurogenic pulmonary edema or acute
respiratory distress syndrome.
●● Neurologic signs. Epilepsy, distemper, postictal neurologic changes, other neurotoxins, intracranial
neoplasia, encephalitis, hepatic encephalopathy,
hypoglycemia, hyperosmolar nonketotic diabetes,
electrolyte changes (hypernatremia, hyponatremia,
hypocalcemia), severe acidemia, or severe uremia.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

Clinical toxicology

891

Diagnosis

Differential diagnosis

History of exposure with compatible clinical signs.
Definitive identification of phosphine gas is difficult, as
it rapidly dissipates in air. Tissue samples or samples of
material ingested, vomitus, or stomach contents should
be rapidly collected, placed in airtight containers, and
frozen. The samples are then submitted to the toxicology
laboratory.

The clinical signs of depression, anorexia, dehydration,
and hypothermia are seen with a variety of diseases that
cause systemic illness in cats. Therefore, the clinician
must be open to numerous possibilities.

Management
There are no specific antidotes for zinc phosphide toxicity. Animals with this toxicity are critically ill. Supportive
critical care should be applied and should specifically
address the respiratory, cardiovascular, neurologic, and
renal systems. Additionally, attention to the GI effects
should be applied.

PLANTS
EASTER LILIES
Common names
Acute kidney injury (AKI) in cats has been associated with
members of the Liliaceae family, including Easter lilies
(Lilium longiflorum), tiger lilies (Lilium tigrinum), rubrum
or Japanese showy lilies (Lilium speciosum and Lilium
lancifolium), and various daylilies (Hemerocallis species).
Plants such as peace lilies (Spathiphyllum species) and
calla lilies (Zantedeschia species) should not be confused
with members of the Liliaceae family.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on compatible clinical signs and clinical
pathology evidence of renal dysfunction after witnessed
ingestion of the toxic plant. There is currently no specific
test to identify the presence of the toxin in the body.

Management
These plants are extremely toxic, therefore with known
recent exposure, GI decontamination procedures should
be rapidly administered (induced emesis followed by
activated charcoal and a cathartic). Immediate IV fluid
administration is necessary to correct dehydration and
maintain diuresis at 2–3 times fluid maintenance requirements. This is continued for 24–72 hours.
Renal parameters, acid–base and electrolyte concentrations, and urine output should be monitored. Dialysis
(hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis) should be provided
if anuric AKI develops. Most cats tend to do well if treated
before dehydration and anuria develop.

GRAPES AND RAISINS
Common names
Various Vitus species are cultivated worldwide for use as
fresh fruit, raisins, juice, and wine.

Source

Source

Lilium species are usually found inside the home as potted plants or cut flowers. Hemerocallis species are common garden plants in many regions.

Toxic ingestions in dogs have involved raisins and grapes
from various sources, including vines on the owners’
property and grocery stores.

Type of toxin

Type of toxin

The toxic principle has not been identified.

The toxic principle involved has not been identified.

Pathophysiology

Pathophysiology

Affected cats develop AKI with renal tubular necrosis.
The basement membrane remains intact, meaning that
tubular epithelial cells can regenerate with prompt and
aggressive treatment.

In 10 dogs that developed AKI after ingesting grapes or
raisins, all had renal proximal tubular degeneration and/
or necrosis with intact basement membranes. Mineralized
tubular debris or casts were also present. Five of the
10 cases showed evidence of epithelial regeneration.

Clinical signs
The most common clinical signs are vomiting, depression, anorexia, dehydration, and hypothermia. Less commonly reported are disorientation, ataxia, facial and paw
edema, dyspnea, and seizures.

K22463_C020.indd 891

Clinical signs
Clinical signs are relatively nonspecific and include
vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, lethargy/depression, and
abdominal pain.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

892

Multisystemic disorders

Differential diagnosis
The clinical signs are nonspecific and can be associated
with nearly any systemic disease; therefore, the clinician
must be open to numerous possibilities. Clinical pathology
findings of AKI encompass a variety of conditions associated with this problem including ethylene glycol, heavy
metals, nephrotoxic antibiotics (e.g. aminoglycosides),
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and leptospirosis.

Diagnosis
The actual toxin responsible for renal injury has not been
identified, therefore specific analytic tests are not available. Evidence of AKI after ingestion is the strongest evidence currently available for a diagnosis.

Management
Recent ingestion should be treated with GI decontamination procedures (emesis/gastric lavage) followed by activated charcoal with a cathartic. IV fluid therapy should
be administered immediately to correct dehydration and
maintain diuresis for at least 48–72 hours. Urine output,
renal clinical pathology parameters, acid–base, and electrolytes should be monitored.

MUSHROOMS
Source
Dogs and cats may encounter various mushroom species
growing in their environment, and may occasionally be
exposed to hallucinogenic mushrooms used illicitly by
humans.

Type of toxin
●● Amanita, Conocybe, Galerina, and Pholiotina species:
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

amatoxins.
Cortinarius species: orellanine.
Tricholoma species.
Muscimol and ibotenic acid.
Monomethylhydrazine.
Muscarine.
Psilocybin and psilocin.

Pathophysiology
●● Amatoxins inhibit mammalian nuclear RNA polymerases involved in transcription of DNA to messenger RNA. Primary target organs are the GI tract,
kidney, and liver, with clinical signs beginning after
a latent period of several hours.
●● Orellanine is a nephrotoxin producing renal tubular
dilatation and necrosis, arterial muscle hyperplasia, epithelial flattening, and interstitial edema and
fibrosis.

K22463_C020.indd 892

●● Muscimol and ibotenic acid act as false neurotrans-

●●

●●

●●

●●

mitters, appearing to cross the blood–brain barrier
using an active transport system.
Monomethylhydrazine-containing mushrooms are
most commonly associated with acute or delayed
GI signs.
Muscarine efficiently binds acetylcholine receptors
throughout the body, initiating muscarinic-type
signs.
Psilocybin and psilocin are structurally similar to
serotonin, with both exerting serotonergic properties
in the peripheral and central nervous systems.
Certain mushroom species associated primarily with
gastroenteritis due to hypersensitivities, irritant
reactions, and some other unknown mechanisms
include Chlorophyllum molybdites, Gomphus floccosus,
Rhodophyllus rhodopolius, and Rhodophyllus sinatus.

Clinical signs
The clinical signs can be quite varied depending on the
type of mushroom ingested. A variety of organ systems
can be affected including the GI tract (vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain), nervous system (muscarinictype effects, excitation, hallucinations), kidney (AKI
signs), liver (signs associated with hepatic failure such as
encephalopathic signs, bleeding, and icterus), and RBCs
(methemoglobinemia, hemolysis).

Differential diagnosis
Because so many organ systems can be involved, the
differential diagnosis list is quite long depending on
the mushroom ingested and the organ system affected.
Therefore, the clinician must always have an index
of suspicion when an animal presents acutely ill in
an area where mushroom exposure is possible. The
clinician should be familiar with the types of mushrooms present in the geographic area where he/she
practices.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on known ingestion of a specific mushroom and compatible clinical signs. Owners should bring
in the potential offending mushroom for identification if
ingestion was witnessed or if there is an acute onset in an
ill pet where mushroom toxicity is possible based on the
clinical findings.

Management
Try to identify the ingested mushroom so that specific
therapy can be anticipated. If ingestion was recent, GI
decontamination should be performed (induce emesis,

25/04/16 11:27 pm

Clinical toxicology

perform gastric lavage) followed by activated charcoal
with a cathartic. Repeated doses of activated charcoal with a cathartic may be necessary in some mushroom toxicities where enterohepatic recirculation is
possible.
Most management is supportive and should be tailored
to the individual animal depending on the organ systems
affected and the clinical signs that are present.

OVER-THE-COUNTER MEDICATIONS
ACETAMINOPHEN
Common names

893

they lack glucuronyl transferase. In addition, the cat’s
sulfation pathway is very inefficient. Due to rapid binding by NAPQI, glutathione stores in the liver and RBCs
are rapidly depleted, leaving them vulnerable to NAPQIinduced oxidative damage.

Clinical signs
Clinical signs in the cat are most commonly due to the
hematological effects and include increased respiratory
rate, respiratory distress, pale/muddy/cyanotic mucous
membranes (Figures 20.15, 20.16), hypothermia, icterus,

20.15

Tylenol, Paracetamol, Anacin-3.

Source
As an analgesic and antipyretic human drug, acetaminophen is available in many prescription and over-thecounter products, both alone and in combination with
other ingredients.

Type of toxin
The toxicity of acetaminophen is the result of the formation
of the reactive metabolite N-acetyl ­p-benzoquinoneimine
(NAPQI).

Pathophysiology
In most species, acetaminophen is metabolized and
excreted primarily by glucuronidation and, to a lesser
extent, by sulfation. As these pathways become saturated,
increasing amounts of NAPQI are formed (Figure 20.14).
Cats are especially sensitive to acetaminophen because
20.16
NH · CO · CH3

NH · CO · CH3

Acetaminophen
(massive dose)

20.14

+ Glucuronic acid
Glucuronide
OH
or sulfate
Microsomal mixed
or sulfate
Intermediates
function oxidase
NH · CO · CH3
unknown
system
N · CO · CH3 Glutathione
Postulated
conjugation
acetaminophen
Glutathione
toxic metabolite
OH
(N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone,
O
Mercapturic acid
imine. NAPQI)
Electrophilic attack
metabolites of
Cell necrosis of nearby structures
acetaminophen
in hepatocyte

(

(

Figure 20.14 Acetaminophen is highly toxic to cats
because of their inability to metabolize it to harmless waste
products. (Adapted from Black M (1987) Hepatotoxic and
hepatoprotective potential of histamine (H2)-receptor
antagonists. Am J Med 83(Suppl 6A):68–75.)

K22463_C020.indd 893

Figures 20.15, 20.16 Methemoglobinemia formation causes
cyanotic mucous membranes. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 11:27 pm

894

Multisystemic disorders

facial (Figure 20.17) and paw edema, depression, and
vomiting.
Clinical signs in the dog are most often referable to
the hepatotoxic effects and include vomiting, anorexia,
tachycardia, tachypnea, abdominal pain, and icterus.
Rarely, dogs can exhibit the hematologic effects without
evidence of liver injury.

serum (Figures 20.18, 20.19), or urine (Figure 20.20) can
be detected and measured (more commonly available in
human diagnostic laboratories).

20.18

Differential diagnosis
Other causes of methemoglobinemia include other toxins
such as nitrites, nitrobenzene, phenacetin, naphthalene,
phenol and cresol, sulfites, and topically applied benzocaine. Methemoglobin reductase deficiency has been
reported in cats. This can result in higher concentrations
of methemoglobin and can demonstrate similar clinical
signs except for the facial and paw edema. Acute hepatic
injury can be due to a variety of toxins as well as pancreatitis and leptospirosis.

Diagnosis
History of exposure and compatible clinical signs are the
basis for the majority of diagnoses made in veterinary
medicine. The presence of acetaminophen in plasma,
20.17

Figure 20.18 Blood tubes showing marked
methemoglobinemia causing the blood to have a characteristic
chocolate brown color. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

20.19

Figure 20.17 Facial edema is a characteristic sign of
acetaminophen intoxication in the cat. It might be caused by
endothelial pathology allowing for plasma leakage into the
interstitial space. There is no known reason for the swelling to
occur in the head region. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C020.indd 894

Figure 20.19 Heinz body hemolytic anemia is caused by
acetaminophen intoxication. Glucocorticoid treatment is not
indicated for this type of hemolysis. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 11:27 pm

Clinical toxicology

Management
If ingestion is very recent, decontamination of the
GI tract (emesis induction, gastric lavage) is indicated, but most cats are presented after clinical signs
develop and absorption of a toxic amount has taken
place. Administration of activated charcoal may
help ­
prevent absorption of any toxin remaining in
the GI tract if ingestion occurred within 4–6 hours of
presentation.
Supportive care with supplemental oxygen and IV
fluids is needed to maintain hydration. A transfusion of
packed RBCs should be administered if anemia develops
and clinical signs attributable to anemia are evident.
Alternatively, a hemoglobin-based oxygen carrier can be
administered (Oxyglobin®, if available).
N-acetylcysteine (140 mg/kg IV or PO initially, followed
by 70 mg/kg IV or PO q6h for an additional 5–7 treatments) serves as a glutathione precursor and is considered an antidote for acetaminophen toxicity.
S-Adenosylmethionine (SAMe) has also been suggested
as a potential adjunctive treatment for dogs and cats with
acetaminophen toxicity.
Ascorbic acid (30 mg/kg PO q6h for 6 treatments) has
been advocated to promote reduction of methemoglobin. Cimetidine (a cytochrome P-450 inhibitor) has also
been advocated, although this has not been evaluated
or described rigorously in clinical veterinary medicine.
New methylene blue has also been suggested as a therapy to reduce methemoglobin, but it is not routinely
used and has a very narrow margin of safety in cats
(Figures 20.21, 20.22).

COUGH AND COLD MEDICATIONS
­(ANTIHISTAMINES, PSEUDOEPHEDRINE)
Source

895

20.20

Figure 20.20 Acetaminophen-induced hemolysis causes this
hemoglobinuria. The green pigment is an acetaminophen urine
metabolite. (Courtesy M. Schaer).

20.21

Figure 20.21 Methylene blue caused blue pigment deposition
in the tissues of this Siamese cat. It is no longer used as a
urinary antiseptic in cats. (Courtesy M. Schaer)
20.22

Pseudoephedrine is a common ingredient in overthe-counter decongestants and cold medications.
Pseudoephedrine has also been used as a substitute for
phenylpropanolamine in the treatment of urinary incontinence in dogs.

Type of toxin
Pseudoephedrine is a sympathomimetic drug that is
structurally similar to amphetamines.

Pathophysiology
The exact mechanism of action is unknown, but it is
believed that pseudoephedrine causes the release of norepinephrine, leading to adrenergic stimulation.

K22463_C020.indd 895

Figure 20.22 Methylene blue ingestion can accentuate the
blood reticulocytes and cause Heinz body hemolytic anemia in
the cat. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 11:27 pm

896

Multisystemic disorders

Clinical signs
Most common are signs associated with CNS stimulation
such as agitation, tachycardia, tremors, disorientation,
and seizures. Hyperthermia, mydriasis, and vomiting are
other signs associated with toxicity.

Differential diagnosis
Any drugs that act as CNS stimulants, tremorgenic toxins,
organophosphates, pyrethrins/pyrethroids, strychnine,
caffeine, cocaine, methylxanthines, hypocalcemia, pheochromocytoma, hyperthyroidism, or CNS disease.

Diagnosis
History of exposure and compatible clinical signs.

Management
Some clinicians feel that emesis induction should be
avoided with this toxicity due to the potential for stimulation of seizures. If agitation is present, phenothiazines such as chlorpromazine or acepromazine are
recommended. Start at low doses and gradually increase
to effect. Tachycardia can be treated with beta-blockers
(e.g. esmolol, propranolol).
Supportive care with IV fluids and monitoring is necessary. Temperature should be monitored if elevated due
to muscle tremors/agitation/hyperactivity. The animal
should be cooled with cool water baths/fans.

cellular metabolism such as GI mucosa and bone marrow
are most sensitive to the effects of 5-fluorouracil. A fatal
outcome is not uncommon.

Clinical signs
Severe and sustained seizures, GI signs (vomiting, diarrhea), mucositis, and signs associated with leukopenia
and thrombocytopenia.

Differential diagnosis
Bone marrow suppression due to any cause, intracranial
and extracranial causes of seizures, any toxins that cause
seizures.

Diagnosis
Exposure and compatible clinical pathology findings
(leukopenia, thrombocytopenia). One report describes
echinocytosis.

Management

TOPICAL MEDICATIONS (CALCIPOTRIENE,
5-FLUOROURACIL, VITAMIN D, ZINC OXIDE)

If ingestion is recent, the GI tract should be decontaminated (emesis/gastric lavage) and further absorption prevented (activated charcoal).
Once animals have compatible clinical signs, supportive
care similar to any animal that has chemotherapy-induced
clinical abnormalities should be provided (i.e. IV fluid
to maintain hydration/electrolyte balance, antiemetics).
Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be provided if leukopenia is diagnosed. Blood transfusion is necessary if anemia
develops from thrombocytopenia-associated hemorrhage.

Calcipotriene

Vitamin D

See Cholecalciferol intoxication.

See Cholecalciferol intoxication.

5-fluorouracil

Zinc oxide

Common names

See Zinc intoxication.

Fluorouracil, Adrucil, Efudex.

Source
5-Fluorouracil is used to treat various cancers in people
and animals.

Type of toxin
5-Fluorouracil is a pyrimidine analog.

Pathophysiology
Cytotoxic 5-fluorouracil metabolites, produced primarily
in the liver, disrupt RNA and inhibit thymidylate synthase. In addition to neoplasms, tissues with high rates of

K22463_C020.indd 896

HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS
SOAPS AND DETERGENTS
Common names
Soaps and detergents are classified according to their
chemical structure. True soaps are salts of fatty acids
obtained from animal or vegetable sources; detergents
are surfactants that contain ingredients such as phosphates, silicates, or carbonates. Detergents are further
classified as nonionic, anionic, or cationic depending on
their charge in solution.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

Clinical toxicology

897

Source

Diagnosis

This group includes hand and bar soaps, shampoos, dishwashing liquids and powders, and laundry detergents.

History of exposure with compatible clinical signs is
suggestive.

Type of toxin

Management

Soaps and detergents work as surfactants, helping to
remove dirt and emulsify grease.

If ingestion is recent and in a large quantity (>20 g/kg
and not a corrosive-containing soap), then emesis can be
induced. Otherwise a diluent such as milk or water should
be administered. Supportive care with IV fluids should
be given if vomiting and diarrhea are profuse. Copious
flushing of the eyes with water or eye irrigating solution
is necessary if there is ocular irritation. Staining for corneal ulcers can be performed, but this is not a common
problem.

Pathophysiology
The majority of bar and liquid hand soaps and nonionic detergents cause mild GI irritation only. The high
alkalinity of anionic dishwashing detergents can cause
severe corrosive lesions. Intravascular hemolysis seen
in patients with impaired liver function is thought to
be related to effects of detergent in the bloodstream.
Quaternary ammonium compounds are cationic detergents that can cause both local and systemic effects
(Figure 20.23). Local effects include corrosive damage to
the GI tract. The exact mechanism of action for the systemic effects is unknown, but these detergents appear
to be able to paralyze neuromuscular junctions of striated muscle.

Clinical signs
Most soaps are low in toxicity but can be irritating to the
GI tract, resulting in vomiting and diarrhea. Some soaps
contain alkali and result in corrosive injury. Ocular irritation occurs if the eyes are exposed.

Differential diagnosis

NONANIONIC DETERGENTS (e.g. SHAMPOOS,
HAND/DISHWASHING AGENTS)
Clinical signs
Similar to noncorrosive soap ingestion, as described
above.

ANIONIC DETERGENTS (DISHWASHING
­DETERGENTS, LAUNDRY DETERGENTS,
RARELY SOME HAIR SHAMPOOS)
Clinical signs
●● Ingestion.

Gastroenteritis due to any cause, pancreatitis, GI foreign
body.

20.23

Primarily GI signs manifested by
vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal discomfort.
Intravascular hemolysis may occur in animals with
liver dysfunction.
●● Dermal exposure. Relatively rare, but prolonged or
repeated exposure can result in skin irritation.
●● Ocular exposure. Ocular irritation, corneal ulcer or
opacity. Conjunctivitis.

Differential diagnosis
●● Ingestion. Soap ingestion, other detergent ingestion,

Figure 20.23 The lingual ulceration in this cat was caused by
accidental contact with a quarternary ammonium cleaning
agent that was used on the cage floor and inadequately wiped
clean. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C020.indd 897

early corrosive ingestion, gastroenteritis due to any
cause, pancreatitis, GI foreign body, nearly anything
that can cause GI signs.
●● Dermal exposure. Other topical irritants, dermatitis,
contact hypersensitivity.
●● Ocular exposure. Conjunctivitis due to any cause,
trauma.

Diagnosis
History of exposure and compatible clinical signs.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

898

Multisystemic disorders

Management
●● Ingestion. Dilute with milk or water. Activated charcoal to prevent absorption if large quantities have
been ingested. IV fluids to maintain hydration and
electrolyte balance if vomiting and diarrhea are
profuse. Monitor for hemolysis if large quantity was
ingested.
●● Dermal exposure. Bathe and rinse exposed areas.
●● Ocular exposure. Copious flushing of exposed eyes
with water or eye irrigating solutions. Stain for corneal ulcer. If present, treat appropriately.

CATIONIC DETERGENTS (GERMICIDES, FABRIC
SOFTENERS, SANITIZERS)
Clinical signs
●● Ingestion. Hypersalivation, vomiting (+/– hematemesis), muscle fasciculations, depression, increased body
temperature, collapse, seizures, or coma. Irritation/
ulceration of the oral, pharyngeal, and gastric mucosal membranes.
●● Dermal exposure. Skin irritation and ulceration; the
full effects of the dermal exposure may not be immediately evident. It can sometimes take 2–3 days to see
the full effects on the skin.
●● Ocular exposure. Ocular irritation, which may range
from mild to severe with deep corneal ulceration.

Differential diagnosis
●● Ingestion. Gastroenteritis, gastric/esophageal ulceration, pancreatitis, GI foreign body, corrosive ingestion.

●● Dermal exposure. Other topical irritants, dermatitis,
contact hypersensitivity.

●● Ocular exposure. Conjunctivitis due to any cause, corneal trauma.

Diagnosis
Exposure with compatible clinical signs.

Management
●● Ingestion. Do not induce vomiting to avoid r­ e-exposing
esophagus to the detergent. Administer oral diluents
such as water, milk, or egg whites. Activated charcoal and a saline cathartic can be given. Severity of
injury may range from mild GI irritation to severe
ulceration and perforation that could result in hypovolemic and/or septic shock. If esophageal or gastric
perforation has occurred, surgery will be required
after cardiovascular stabilization. If perforation has

K22463_C020.indd 898

not occurred, supportive care with IV fluids, gastroprotectants, pain management, and nutritional
supplementation should be provided. Esophageal
stricture may be a long-term sequela.
●● Dermal exposure. Rinse affected area thoroughly
with soap and water.
●● Ocular exposure. Lavage exposed eye(s) with isotonic
saline for 20–30 minutes. Eyes should be assessed for
corneal ulcers and if present, treated appropriately.

COMMON HOUSEHOLD CHLORINE BLEACHES
Common names
Most household bleaches contain 3–6% sodium hypochlorite. Swimming pool chlorines may contain 50%
hypochlorite.

Source
Hypochlorite bleaches are commonly used as disinfectants and water purifiers.

Type of toxin
Household bleaches are mild to moderate GI irritants.

Pathophysiology
The corrosive nature of a hypochlorite bleach is due to its
strong oxidizing potential. In the acidic environment of
the stomach, hypochlorous acid is formed, which is able
to penetrate mucous membranes.

Clinical signs
●● Ingestion can cause mild to moderate mucosal irritation manifested by hypersalivation, oropharyngeal
irritation, vomiting, and abdominal pain.
●● Inhalation of fumes can cause respiratory signs such
as coughing, retching, and difficulty breathing.
●● Ocular exposure. Similar to cationic detergents, but
problems may not be as severe depending on concentration of sodium hypochlorite.

Differential diagnosis
●● Ingestion. Gastroenteritis, gastric/esophageal ulceration, pancreatitis, GI foreign body, corrosive ingestion.

●● Dermal exposure. Other topical irritants, dermatitis,
contact hypersensitivity.

●● Inhalation. Upper respiratory tract infection, pneumonia, collapsing trachea.

●● Ocular exposure. Conjunctivitis due to any cause, corneal trauma.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

Clinical toxicology

Diagnosis
History of exposure and compatible clinical signs.

Management
Management is similar to that for cationic detergents,
although the injuries associated with common household
chlorine bleaches tend to be not as severe at the more
common lower sodium hypochlorite concentrations.

ETHYLENE GLYCOL
Source
Ethylene glycol is the main ingredient in most antifreeze
products. Small concentrations of ethylene glycol are also
present in some paints.

Pathophysiology
Metabolism of ethylene glycol to glycolaldehyde, glycolic
acid, glyoxalic acid, and oxalic acid leads to metabolic acidosis, AKI, and cardiopulmonary failure.

899

they can cause a hyperechoic pattern with ultrasonography (Figure 20.31).
The presence of ethylene glycol in blood or urine
can be detected using a specific ethylene glycol test kit,
although the reliability of the kit has been questioned
(Figure 20.32). Ethylene glycol is usually not detectable in
blood or urine 2–3 days after ingestion. Suspicion of ethylene glycol in blood can be made from detecting a high
osmolar gap or high anion gap acidosis, but these are not
specific for ethylene glycol.
Using a Wood’s lamp and detecting fluorescence on
some noningested material or urine may suggest ethylene glycol intoxication because many antifreeze solutions contain a fluorescent dye. This test may be positive
in the urine up to 6 hours after ingestion. A negative test
does not rule out ethylene glycol ingestion.
20.24

Clinical signs
Initial signs (30 minutes to 12 hours after ingestion)
include primarily neurologic changes such as ataxia,
altered mentation, seizures, and coma (Figures 20.24,
20.25). Other signs include vomiting, polydipsia, and
polyuria. Later signs (36–72 hours after ingestion; 12–24
hours in cats) are due to uremia secondary to AKI. Renal
pain on abdominal palpation may also be noted.

Differential diagnosis
●● Neurologic changes. Hepatic encephalopathy, neurotoxins, hypoglycemia, severe electrolyte changes
(hyponatremia,
hypernatremia,
hypocalcemia),
encephalitis, intracranial neoplasia, hyperosmolar
nonketotic diabetes, intracranial infection (e.g. viral,
protozoan, rickettsial, bacterial), head trauma, or
stroke.
●● Any potential cause of AKI (Figures 20.26, 20.27).

Figure 20.24 This cat is in a stupor caused by the central
nervous system toxic effects of the glycoaldehyde metabolite of
ethylene glycol. The prognosis is usually grave at this stage of
disease. (Courtesy M. Schaer)
20.25

Diagnosis
History of exposure with compatible clinical signs is adequate to begin therapy, since this toxin acts rapidly and
irreversible devastating effects can occur prior to obtaining a definitive confirmation (see below). Calcium oxalate crystals may be detected in the urine within 6 hours
after ingestion and lend strong support to the diagnosis
(Figures 20.28, 20.29). The absence of these crystals does
not rule out ethylene glycol intoxication. Oxalate crystals
can also be found in the kidneys (Figure 20.29), where

K22463_C020.indd 899

Figure 20.25 This German Shepherd Dog puppy is comatose
and anuric from the combined effects of glycoaldehyde and
oxalate crystalluria, respectively, caused by antifreeze ingestion.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 11:27 pm

900

Multisystemic disorders

20.26

20.28

20.29

Figures 20.28, 20.29 A microscopic view of a urine sediment
showing monohydrate (20.28) and dihydrate (20.29) oxalate
crystals. (Courtesy M. Schaer)
20.30
20.27

Figures 20.26, 20.27 (20.26) Post-mortem view of swollen
kidneys in a cat that had ethylene glycol-caused irreversible
renal tubular damage. (20.27) Close up view of one of the
kidneys showing the subcapsular edema, which is rarely seen
by the clinician. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Management
Ethylene glycol is absorbed and metabolized rapidly;
therefore, management should begin immediately if
ingestion is suspected. Because absorption is so rapid,
gastric elimination (emesis) is usually not effective, but
it can be tried if there are no contraindications to doing

K22463_C020.indd 900

Figure 20.30 Histopathologic view of a cat kidney showing
oxalate deposits in the renal tubules. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 11:27 pm

Clinical toxicology

20.31

Figure 20.31 The deposit of large amounts of oxalate crystals
in the kidney causes a characteristic ultrasonographic image
with hyperechogenicity of the renal cortex. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

901

20.33

Figure 20.33 Administering ethyl alcohol as an antidote can
cause marked inebriation and possible alcohol intoxication.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

●● Dogs and cats: 1.3 ml/kg of 30% ethanol IV bolus followed by 0.42 ml/kg/hour for 48 hours.

20.32

Supportive care with IV fluids and monitoring urine
­output, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, electrolytes, and
acid–base balance is also recommended.

BATTERIES
Source
Figures 20.32 An ethylene glycol kit is commercially available
for detecting ethylene glycol in the blood. The dark tube is a
positive test. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Batteries ranging from small button or disk batteries up
to the large D size are used in remote controls, smoke
alarms, clocks, watches, and toys.

this. If ingestion is recent (within hours), the ideal therapy
is hemodialysis to remove the toxin, but this is available
only in a small number of referral veterinary hospitals.
Inhibition of conversion of ethylene glycol to its toxic
metabolites is the mainstay of therapy. The drug of choice
was 4-methylypyrazole (fomepizole) (no longer available
as a veterinary drug in the USA):

Type of toxin

●● Dogs: 20 mg/kg IV followed by 15 mg/kg IV at 12 and

Pathophysiology

24 hours and 5 mg/kg IV at 36 hours. This therapy
is not effective if given after the ethylene glycol has
been metabolized and AKI is present.
●● Cats: 125 mg/kg IV then 31.25 mg/kg IV at 12, 24, and
36 hours after the initial bolus. Note the comparatively much higher dose for the cat than the dog.

Ingestion of batteries may cause several types of injury:
acid or alkali burns; current-induced tissue necrosis;
metal toxicity from the battery casings; GI obstruction.

Ethanol may be used if 4-methylpyrazole is not available, but it is not considered as efficacious and has more
side-effects (Figure 20.33):

K22463_C020.indd 901

Alkaline batteries contain potassium hydroxide or
sodium hydroxide. Disk, nickel–cadmium, mercuric oxide,
and silver batteries are generally alkaline. Ingested lithium batteries can generate current and produce alkali.
Acidic dry cell batteries contain ammonium chloride and
manganese dioxide.

Clinical signs
Clinical signs are primarily related to GI tract irritation/
ulceration/perforation and can range from no signs
to anorexia, vomiting/regurgitation, abdominal pain,
hypersalivation, retching, fever, difficulty breathing,
hypovolemia, and septic shock.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

902

Multisystemic disorders

Differential diagnosis
Ingestion of caustic substances, esophageal or GI foreign
body, esophageal stricture or rupture, gastroenteritis,
pancreatitis, septic peritonitis, and intussusception.

●● Paradichlorobenzene-containing mothballs. Acute
abdomen signs: pancreatitis, GI foreign body, gastric
ulceration, or intussusception; neurologic signs: other
neurotoxins, general causes of seizures.

Diagnosis

Diagnosis

History of ingestion and radiographic confirmation.

Both naphthalene and paradichlorobenzene types: history of exposure and compatible clinical signs.

Management
The principles of critical care should be applied if the animal is severely compromised secondary to esophageal
or GI perforation. Surgical or endoscopic removal of the
­battery may be necessary. If esophageal or gastric ulceration is present, GI protectants (e.g. sucralfate, H2 blockers, proton pump inhibitors) should be provided. Feeding
tubes and nutritional support will be necessary if the animal is unable to eat.

MOTHBALLS
Source
Mothballs contain either naphthalene or paradichlorobenzene. Naphthalene is found in ‘old-fashioned’ mothballs. In addition to mothballs, paradichlorobenzene is
also found in deodorizer cakes.

Type of toxin
Naphthalene is a bicyclic aromatic hydrocarbon, naturally found as a component of petroleum and coal.
Paradichlorobenzene is an organochlorine insecticide.

Pathophysiology
Metabolism of naphthalene by the liver can produce epoxides or quinines that cause cellular damage.
Paradichlorobenzene is oxidized then rapidly conjugated
for excretion. Paradichlorobenzene is considered less
toxic than naphthalene.

Clinical signs
●● Naphthalene-containing mothballs. Similar to acetaminophen ingestion in cats: vomiting, methemoglobinemia, hemolytic anemia, hemoglobinuria, and
possible liver damage.
●● Paradichlorobenzene-containing mothballs. Acute
abdomen (vomiting and abdominal pain), tremors,
seizures, and possible liver or kidney injury.

Differential diagnosis
●● Naphthalene-containing mothballs. Any oxidant type
toxin: zinc, acetaminophen, and onions; immunemediated hemolytic anemia.

K22463_C020.indd 902

Management
●● Naphthalene-containing mothballs. Gastric decontamination if ingestion is recent (emesis followed
by activated charcoal with a cathartic). Give 4 mg/kg
(dogs) or 1.5 mg/kg (cats) of 1% methylene blue IV
(discontinue if hemolysis occurs). Supportive
care with IV fluids and blood transfusions as
indicated.
●● Paradichlorobenzene-containing mothballs. Gastric
decontamination if ingestion is recent (emesis followed by activated charcoal with a cathartic). IV fluids to induce diuresis. Symptomatic supportive care.
Diazepam to control seizures or tremors.

METALS
LEAD
Source
Even though lead-based household paints are no longer commonly in use, pets may be exposed to lead paint
chips and dusts in older homes, especially during remodeling projects. Other lead sources include lead solder,
leaded gasoline, some soils, lead-containing toys, lead
bullets and shot, and weights from fishing tackle and
curtains.

Pathophysiology
The duodenum is the primary site of lead absorption
(Figure 20.34); absorbed lead is then transported to
soft tissues (liver, kidney, brain) and bone. Chronic lead
exposure inhibits heme synthesis, resulting in mild to
moderate anemia. Acute lead exposure increases intracytoplasmic calcium levels, causing cell death and neuronal
impairment.

Clinical signs
Primarily GI and neurologic signs. GI signs in order
of decreasing frequency include vomiting, anorexia,
diarrhea, and abdominal pain (Figures 20.35, 20.36).
Neurologic signs include seizures, hysteria, lethargy,
ataxia, blindness, and jaw champing.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

Clinical toxicology

20.34

903

Differential diagnosis
●● GI signs. Pancreatitis, GI foreign body, intussusception, parvovirus enteritis, intestinal parasitism, gastroenteritis or GI ulceration.
●● Neurologic signs. Other neurotoxins, distemper, epilepsy, hypoglycemia, hepatic encephalopathy, or
electrolyte changes (severe hyponatremia, hypernatremia, or hypocalcemia).

Diagnosis
Figure 20.34 This lateral abdominal radiograph shows a
metallic density in the duodenum. This was ingested paint
that contained lead. Lead lines are visible at the endplates
of the vertebral bodies, which prompted the radiograph
shown in Figure 20.36. A diagnosis of lead poisoning is often
made indirectly until the blood level results return from the
laboratory. (Courtesy M. Schaer)
20.35

History of exposure and compatible clinical signs is
supportive for the diagnosis but not definitive. Finding
increased nucleated RBCs without signs of red cell regeneration is supportive, along with exposure history and
compatible clinical signs (Figure 20.37).

Definitive diagnosis
Whole blood lead concentration above 2.88 µmol/l
(60 µg/dl [0.6 ppm]) is definitive. Whole blood lead concentration between 1.44 and 2.5 µmol/l (30 and 50 µg/dl
[0.3 and 0.5 ppm]) with compatible clinical signs is also
definitive.

Management

Figure 20.35 This Poodle puppy had lead colic from
contaminated paint chip ingestion. Note the tucked abdominal
posture. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

IV diazepam should be given if seizures are present and
IV mannitol if seizures are severe or persistent. IV fluids
should be given to maintain fluid, electrolyte, and acid–
base balance.
The GI tract should be decontaminated if a lead source
is present. Surgical removal of large metallic GI foreign
bodies may be required. If flecks of lead paint are present in the GI tract, enemas can be used to remove the
flecks from the colon. A sulfate-containing cathartic that
might chelate the lead in the GI tract can be administered
(e.g. magnesium sulfate, sodium sulfate).

20.36

20.37

Figure 20.36 Radiograph of the Poodle puppy in Figure 20.35
showing increased radiographic density of it growth plates as a
result of lead deposition.

Figure 20.37 Nucleated RBCs and basophilic stippling are
characteristic hematologic changes caused by plumbism (lead
poisoning). (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C020.indd 903

25/04/16 11:27 pm

904

Multisystemic disorders

The lead in the blood can be chelated using dimercaptosuccinic acid (succimer) at 10 mg/kg PO q8h for 10 days or,
if Succimer is not available, calcium EDTA (100 mg/kg/day
SC divided q6h for 2–5 days). However, calcium EDTA has
potential nephrotoxic effects, so the total dose should not
exceed 2 g/day. The calcium EDTA should be diluted with
5% dextrose to a concentration of 10 mg/ml to reduce the
pain of the injection. Hydration with fluid diuresis should
be maintained during calcium EDTA therapy.
Clinical signs should improve within 24–48 hours after
starting therapy. Blood lead concentrations should be
repeated 2–3 weeks after cessation of chelation therapy.
Owners should be warned about the potential for
human exposure and referred to their family doctor.

IRON
Source
Iron is found in relatively small amounts in most multivitamin products, although prenatal vitamins and
supplements used to treat iron-deficient conditions may
contain much higher amounts. Most ingestions of multivitamins do not represent significant iron exposures in
pet animals, although massive ingestions or those involving products containing higher quantities of iron could
potentially result in severe clinical signs.

Type of toxin

ZINC

The highly reactive nature of iron, which allows it to
play a major role in biologic redox reactions, also makes
unbound iron potentially toxic.

Source

Pathophysiology

Common sources of zinc include USA pennies minted after
1982, galvanized metal objects, and zinc oxide ointments.

Iron toxicosis is due to both direct effects on the GI mucosa
and excessive unbound iron in the circulation.

Type of toxin

Clinical signs

The exact mechanism of zinc toxicity is unknown.

The three major organ systems affected are the GI, cardiovascular, and central nervous systems. GI signs include
vomiting, hematemesis, diarrhea (bloody, melena), and
abdominal pain. Cardiovascular signs include cardiovascular collapse/shock. Neurologic signs include depression, and muscle tremors. Severe hepatic injury can occur
with severe intoxication (Figure 20.39).
GI signs generally occur within the first 6 hours of
ingestion. This can be followed by apparent recovery for
the next 24 hours, but then GI signs return and the more
severe signs associated with the nervous system and cardiovascular collapse can occur.

Pathophysiology
Organs that accumulate the highest concentrations of
zinc following ingestion include the liver, kidney, pancreas, and RBCs. Intravascular hemolysis is the most common manifestation of zinc toxicity.

Clinical signs
Vomiting is an extremely common clinical sign (nearly 90%
of dogs with zinc toxicity). Other signs primarily relate to
hemolysis and include weakness, lethargy, tachypnea, pale
mucous membranes, rapid heart rate, and pigmenturia.

20.38

Differential diagnosis
All potential causes of hemolytic anemia including
immune-mediated and oxidant injury (e.g. onions).

Diagnosis
Hemolytic anemia and identification of a GI metallic foreign body warrant retrieval of the metallic foreign body.
Most foreign bodies are in the stomach. Increased blood zinc
levels with evidence of hemolysis confirm the diagnosis.

Management
The metallic foreign body should be removed (Figure 20.38).
Supportive care with IV fluids and blood transfusions is
given as indicated. Most cases resolve within 2–3 days after
the zinc source is removed.

K22463_C020.indd 904

Figure 20.38 Gastroscopic removal of a zinc-containing USA
penny. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

25/04/16 11:27 pm

Clinical toxicology

Differential diagnosis

HUMAN FOODS

Gastroenteritis, intestinal ulcers, pancreatitis, bacterial
enteritis, corrosive ingestion, intestinal foreign body,
intussusception, viral enteritis, and distemper.

ALLIUM SPECIES

Diagnosis
Total iron binding capacity and serum iron concentration
should be measured 4–6 hours after ingestion to get an
accurate representation of a consistent serum concentration. Poisoning does not occur unless serum iron concentration exceeds serum iron binding capacity.

Management
GI decontamination (emesis induction/gastric lavage) is
necessary if ingestion was recent. Activated charcoal and
saline cathartics have not been shown to be helpful. In
animals with clinical signs:

●● Aggressive IV fluid resuscitation if in shock.
●● IV fluids to maintain hydration and electrolyte
balance.

●● GI protectants (sucralfate).
●● Chelation
therapy
if

severe
intoxication.
Deferoxamine (if ingestion was within the last
12 hours): CRI at 15 mg/kg/hour (monitor for cardiac arrhythmias/hypotension). If CRI is not possible, IM injections (40 mg/kg q4–8h), although this is
not considered as effective as CRI. Continue chelation therapy until serum iron concentration is below
300 µg/dl (53.7 µmol/l) or measured serum iron concentration is below the serum iron binding capacity.

20.39

Figure 20.39 Histopathologic signs caused by adverse effects
of iron in the liver. The parenchymal pathology is extensive.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C020.indd 905

905

Source

ALL

Various types of onions, garlic, scallions, leeks, chives,
and products containing powdered or granulated onions
and garlic.

Type of toxin
Allium spp. contain organosulfur compounds that cause
oxidant injury to RBCs.

Pathophysiology
Oxidation of the sulfhydryl groups of hemoglobin results
in Heinz body formation, oxidation of membrane lipid
and sulfhydryl groups, and methemoglobin formation.
As a result, RBC membranes become less deformable and
more fragile, resulting in hemolysis.

Clinical signs
Common clinical signs include lethargy, weakness,
anorexia, pigmenturia, and pale mucous membranes
(Figure 20.40).

Differential diagnosis
Zinc toxicity, immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, RBC
parasites.

Diagnosis
Clinical history of ingestion of an Allium spp., compatible
clinical signs, and the presence of Heinz body anemia and
methemoglobinemia all support a diagnosis of Allium
toxicity.
20.40

Figure 20.40 A urine sample from an onion-intoxicated dog
showing methemoglobinuria.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

906

Multisystemic disorders

Management

Management

Vomiting can be induced in asymptomatic animals
within 1–6 hours of ingestion, followed by activated charcoal once vomiting has been controlled. Treatment is supportive with the administration of IV fluids and packed
RBC transfusions as needed.

If ingestion was within 1–6 hours of presentation and
there are no contraindications, induction of vomiting is
recommended. Activated charcoal is not administered as
it binds poorly to xylitol.
Hypoglycemic animals should receive 0.25–0.5 g/kg of
50% dextrose diluted with saline, then continued IV fluids
containing 2.5–5% dextrose. Small frequent meals should
also be provided if the patient is able to eat without vomiting. Antiemetics and GI protectants should be added if
vomiting is present or persistent.
In cases of severe acute hepatic necrosis, provide supportive care (see Chapter 9: Liver disorders). Although
their efficacy has not been definitively proven for this
use, medications that support liver function (SAMe,
vitamin C, vitamin E, silymarin, N-acetylcysteine) may
be beneficial. Vitamin K1 and/or fresh or fresh-frozen
plasma transfusions may be indicated if severe coagulopathies are present.

XYLITOL
Source
Xylitol is an artificial sweetener most commonly found
in sugarless gum and other ‘sugar-free’ items such as,
­peanut butter, candies, mints, nicotine gums, chewable
vitamins, baked goods, and some oral care products.

Type of toxin
Induces insulin synthesis and release in dogs.

Pathophysiology
The exact mechanism by which xylitol stimulates the
synthesis and release of insulin in dogs is unknown. The
resulting hyperinsulinemia primarily results in hypoglycemia and potentially hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia. Increased ALT and AST may also occur secondary to
liver damage. The exact cause of the hepatotoxicity has
not been determined, but possible mechanisms include
cellular ATP depletion, excessive reactive oxygen species,
and binding of anti-xylitol antibodies to hepatic vessels.
A dosage of >0.1g/kg can induce hypoglycemia; >0.5 g/kg
may also potentially cause hepatotoxicity.

Clinical signs

METHYLXANTHINES
Source
These naturally occurring alkaloids are found in beverages, foods, and some dietary supplements. Chocolate
contains caffeine and theobromine. Unsweetened and
dark chocolate contains higher levels of methylxanthines
than milk or white chocolate. Caffeine is also present in
coffee, tea, other beverages, and herbal supplements containing guarana (Paullinia cupana). Another potential
source of caffeine is cocoa bean hulls, which are sometimes used as mulch.

The most common clinical signs are depression, vomiting,
ataxia, and seizures. When hepatotoxicity has occurred,
ecchymoses, icterus, and GI hemorrhages have also been
noted.

Type of toxin

Differential diagnosis

Pathophysiology

Insulin overdose, oral hypoglycemia medication ingestion, insulin-like secreting tumors, insulinoma, liver
failure, hypoadrenocorticism, acute hepatic necrosis, portocaval shunt.

The clinical signs appear to be related to competitive inhibition of cellular adenosine receptors. Cellular calcium
reuptake inhibition and competition for benzodiazepine
receptors may also be involved. The significant amount of
fat in many chocolate products may also cause GI upset
and/or pancreatitis. The half-life of caffeine and theobromine in dogs is 4.5 and 17.5 hours, respectively.

Diagnosis
Clinical history of ingestion of a xylitol-containing product combined with hypoglycemia and/or increased ALT
and AST support a diagnosis of xylitol toxicosis. Routine
toxicology screening tests for the detection of xylitol are
not available, so it is important to rule out other possible
differential diagnoses.

K22463_C020.indd 906

Methylxanthines produce positive inotropic and chronotropic effects on the heart, cerebral vasoconstriction,
renal vasorelaxation, and GI smooth muscle relaxation.

Clinical signs
The most common signs in dogs include vomiting, restlessness, tachycardia with or with cardiac arrhythmias, tachypnea, polyuria, hyperthermia, tremors, and

25/04/16 11:27 pm

Clinical toxicology

seizures. Death may occur due to arrhythmias or respiratory failure (Figures 20.41, 20.42).

Differential diagnosis
Pseudoephedrine, amphetamines, antihistamines, cocaine,
other causes of seizures.
20.41

907

Diagnosis
Clinical history of ingestion of a caffeine and/or
theobromine-containing product and compatible clini­
cal signs support a diagnosis of methylxanthine intoxication. Some laboratories may be able to screen stomach
contents, serum, plasma, or urine for methylxanthines.

Management
Emesis may be induced in asymptomatic dogs and cats
if the ingestion has been recent; however, gastric lavage
may be more effective for breaking down and removing
large masses of chocolate from the stomach. Activated
charcoal can be given after either procedure, and multiple doses may be beneficial due to the long half-life of
theobromine. Electrolytes should be monitored in animals with diarrhea and those receiving multiple doses of
activated charcoal.
IV fluids should be administered following significant
exposure to enhance excretion of caffeine, and other
treatments should be tailored to any signs that develop.
Tremors may be controlled with diazepam or methocarbamol, and seizures may additionally require phenobarbital or gas anesthesia.
Tachyarrhythmias may be treated with beta-blockers
or lidocaine, and atropine can be used for bradycardia.
Prognosis is generally good for patients that receive
timely care.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
20.42

Figures 20.41, 20.42 This Pug shows nausea and vomiting
after ingesting a large amount of dark chocolate. (Courtesy
M. Schaer)

K22463_C020.indd 907

Gupta RC (2007) Ivermectin and selamectin. In: Veterinary
Toxicology: Basic and Clinical Principles. (ed. RC Gupta)
Academic Press, New York.
Khan SA, Hooser SB (2012) (eds.) Common toxicologic issues
in small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
42(2):xi–xii.
Kidwell JH, Buckley GJ, Allen AE et al. (2014) Use of lipid
­emulsion for treatment of ivermectin toxicosis in a cat.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 50(1):59–61.
Macintire DK, Drobatz KJ, Haskins SC et al. (2005) Manual of
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care Medicine. Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia.
Peterson ME, Talcott PA (2006) (eds.) Small Animal Toxicology,
2nd edn. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.
Plumb DC (2011) (ed.) Plumb’s Veterinary Drug Handbook,
7th edn. Blackwell Publishing, Ames.
Poppenga RH, Gwaltney-Brant SM (2011) (eds.) Small Animal
Toxicology Essentials. Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester.

25/04/16 11:27 pm

This page intentionally left blank

909

Chapter 21
Infectious diseases
Richard B. Ford & Annette Litster

INTRODUCTION
Today, access to an impressive array of diagnostic testing platforms, whether performed at the point of care
or through commercial laboratories, has proven to be
among the most significant factors influencing how
veterinarians manage infectious disease risk and the
level of care that can be provided to the individual
patient. Advanced diagnostic technology has not only
increased our awareness of the spectrum of infectious
agents capable of causing clinical illness in companion
animals, it has made it quite clear that co-infection (i.e.
simultaneous infection with two or more pathogens in
the same patient at the same time) is prevalent in veterinary medicine and can be a major turning point in
the outcome.
The significance of co-infection in veterinary patients
is most apparent to the clinician who is attempting to
establish a diagnosis of infectious disease. Traditional
textbooks, including this one, provide descriptions
of characteristic clinical manifestations associated
with single pathogens. Yet when faced with the sick
patient, clinical signs alone frequently may not fit a
conventional clinical description that leads to a diagnosis. The astute clinician must be able to assimilate historical and clinical information, along with knowledge
of diagnostic test availability, interpretation, and testing limitations, to arrive at a diagnostic conclusion and
prescribe a rational treatment regimen in the infected
patient.
The discussion on infectious diseases that follows is
not intended to be comprehensive. Instead, the diseases
presented in this chapter represent the most common
infections encountered in dogs and cats seen in clinical
practice. Updates on practical, accessible, diagnostic testing protocols, treatment recommendations, and prevention/vaccination are included.

K22463_C021.indd 909

Part 1: The dog
Richard B. Ford
BACTERIAL AND SPIROCHETAL INFECTIONS
CANINE INFECTIOUS RESPIRATORY DISEASE
Definition/overview
Canine infectious respiratory disease (CIRD) is the descriptive term that replaces ‘kennel cough’ in the veterinary
literature. Previous descriptive terms include canine
cough, canine croup, and infectious tracheobronchitis.
Nonetheless, each of these terms refers to a contagious,
acute-onset, upper respiratory tract infection characteristically manifesting as cough. Occasionally, lower respiratory disease (bronchopneumonia) will result and may
become life-threatening, particularly in young dogs. CIRD
can occur in dogs of any age; risk is particularly high
among co-housed dogs (e.g. boarding kennels, day care
facilities, dog parks).

Etiology
Because clinical manifestations vary according to the primary infecting agent, or combination of agents, CIRD is
also described as a respiratory syndrome. Bordetella bronchiseptica is commonly implicated as the principal cause
of kennel cough; however, it is by no means the exclusive, nor is it the most virulent, pathogen involved. The
pathogenic agents implicated in CIRD are summarized in
Table 21.1.

Pathophysiology
Bacterial pathogens
Among the pathogens implicated in CIRD, B. bronchiseptica has received the most attention. B. bronchiseptica is a
gram-negative coccobacillus that has the unique ability to

23/04/16 1:28 pm

910

Multisystemic disorders

Table 21.1 The most common respiratory pathogens
implicated in canine infectious respiratory disease.
Bacterial agents
Bordetella bronchiseptica
Streptococcus equi subspecies zooepidemicus
Mycoplasma spp. (Mycoplasma cynos is frequently implicated)
Viral agents
Canine parainfluenza virus
Canine adenovirus-2
Canine influenza virus
Canine distemper virus
Canine respiratory coronavirus
Canine pneumovirus

the dog is co-infected. Bacterial pathogens ­
(discussed
above) in combination with CIV can result severe respiratory disease and death.
Other viral respiratory pathogens (Table 21.1) are
associated with CIRD. Canine distemper virus (CDV) is
not commonly implicated as a primary agent of CIRD
because respiratory disease is just one of the severe systemic manifestations that occur in unvaccinated dogs.
Canine adenovirus-2 (CAV-2), canine respiratory coronavirus (CRCoV), and canine pneumovirus (CPnV) infections
appear to occur less commonly and may actually be most
important as cofactors in CIRD.

Clinical presentation
live on the respiratory epithelium as a commensal (normal flora) organism. For reasons not fully understood,
these ‘innocent’ bacteria are able to transition into highly
pathogenic organisms. Bordetella virulence is linked to
a gene complex (Bvg) capable of expressing multiple,
well-defined virulence factors (toxins) that cause serious,
rapid injury to respiratory epithelium. Because B. bronchiseptica can be recovered from the respiratory tract of
healthy dogs, it poses significant risk in dogs exposed to a
viral respiratory pathogen, as co-infected dogs appear to
have significantly more severe disease than dogs infected
by a single respiratory pathogen.
More recently, Streptococcus equi subspecies zooepidemicus, a gram-positive bacterium, has been recognized as an important cofactor in the pathophysiology of
CIRD. Although not a commensal organism in dogs/cats,
S. zooepidemicus is capable of colonizing upper respiratory epithelial cells of dogs and cats. It appears to
be a significant cofactor in upper respiratory infections of dogs and cats and has been attributed to fatal
necrohemorrhagic pneumonia in outbreaks of CIRD in
shelters

Viral pathogens
Canine parainfluenza virus (CPiV) is perhaps best recognized for its ability to cause inflammation of the tracheal
and laryngeal epithelium. Vocal fold swelling increases
the resistance to airflow during exhalation, resulting in
the so-called ‘goose honk’ cough. In contrast to B. bronchiseptica, CPiV is a short-lived, although highly contagious,
respiratory pathogen in dogs.
Canine influenza virus (CIV) is an H3N8 virus that is
known to have been derived from the equine influenza
virus. Virus shedding is generally limited to less than
14 days post infection. Experimentally infected dogs
demonstrate fever and mild inflammation involving
tracheal epithelium. Viral pneumonitis is uncommon.
Clinical infection is generally considered to be mild unless

K22463_C021.indd 910

Clinical signs vary based on the individual agent responsible for infection in clinically affected dogs. The clinical
history typically reveals recent exposure to other dogs.
Viral pathogens tend to be associated with clinical
signs ranging from an acute-onset, highly contagious
cough with expectoration of mucus that typically lasts
1–2 weeks to mild or no clinical signs (seroconversion
only). Although coughing may persist for several weeks,
dogs tend to effectively clear infectious viruses within
2 weeks ­following onset of signs.
Bacterial pathogens tend to be associated with not
only cough, but systemic illness characterized by mucoid
to mucopurulent nasal and ocular discharge, fever, and
loss of appetite. Other clinical findings include orthopnea, dyspnea, and even life-threatening pneumonia,
­particularly in young animals. Clinical signs can persist for several days or longer depending on treatment
administered.
Clinical illness associated with individual pathogens,
however, does not necessarily represent the spectrum
of clinical manifestations encountered in practice. For
example, reports of dogs with confirmed CIV infection
indicate that some simply seroconvert without­developing significant respiratory signs, while others die.
However, it is unlikely that agents implicated in CIRD,
acting alone, cause such severe or life-threatening respiratory disease; CIRD likely results from the complex
interaction between:

●● Host.
●● Multiple respiratory pathogens acting together (viral
and bacterial).

●● Environmental factors.
The occurrence of co-infection explains, at least in part,
why predicting clinical outcomes of CIRD in individual
dogs can be difficult, and it explains why well vaccinated
dogs still develop kennel cough.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

Differential diagnosis
Importantly, B. bronchiseptica infection, in the absence of
culture, is difficult to distinguish from any acute bacterial
pneumonia, whether primary or secondary to an underlying viral infection (e.g. CIV, CDV, CpiV infection).

Diagnosis
Clinical diagnosis of CIRD is commonly established on
the basis of history and clinical signs. Establishing a
definitive diagnosis of CIRD is complicated by at least
three ­
factors: (1) isolation of the individual agent(s)
involved entails laboratory-based isolation capabilities
not ­available in practice; (2) the duration of clinical illness tends to be r­elatively short-lived; and (3) most of
the agents i­ mplicated have been recovered from healthy
(noncoughing) dogs.
However, some laboratories do provide individual test
capability (e.g. culture, PCR) for individual agents implicated in CIRD. Tests must be requested on an individual
basis. Currently, a comprehensive ‘CIRD panel’ is not
available.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
In most cases, clinical signs progress rapidly, j­ ustifying
the need for antimicrobial intervention before
bacterial isolates can be identified. Empiric treat­
ment of affected puppies is indicated. Doxycycline
(liquid) (2.5–5.0 mg/kg PO q12h for 5–7 days) is recommended.
Alternative
antimicrobials
include
amoxicillin–­
clavulanate (12.5–25 mg/kg PO q12h for
10 days ­[(minimum]), and ­trimethoprim–sulfonamide
(15 mg/kg PO q12h for 10 days [minimum]).
Healthy, but coughing, dogs may receive short-term
treatment with a corticosteroid to reduce inflammation
of the respiratory epithelium and manage coughing paroxysms. Treatment should be limited to 5 days without
risk of complications and should be supplemented with
an antimicrobial. Predisolone (0.5 mg/kg PO once or
twice daily) is usually sufficient to reduce the intensity
of cough.
Doxycycline, like tetracycline, can yellow the enamel
of developing permanent teeth (Figure 21.1). This complication can be minimized in puppies by limiting the
duration of treatment to less than 10 days. In puppies,
a clinical response to treatment should be detectable
within 24–72 hours.
The prognosis for affected dogs is good to excellent. Many infections resolve spontaneously within
10–14 days. Clinical signs may persist beyond the time of
viral shedding. Infected puppies appear to be at greater

K22463_C021.indd 911

911

risk for developing complications associated with CIRD
(e.g. bronchopneumonia). Outcomes are directly related
to the severity of disease at the time antimicrobial therapy is started and any co-infecting pathogens.
Aggressive intervention with antimicrobial therapy
is critical in the effective management of outbreaks.
Other factors influencing outbreaks include the ability
to depopulate the facility, cleanliness of the facilities,
­ventilation (12–16 complete air exchanges per hour are
recommended), and the ability to provide supportive
care in the form of rehydration, nutrition, and cleaning
of nasal discharges.

Prevention
In the USA, routine vaccination of dogs at risk for
­exposure is indicated and generally effective in reducing
severity of cough in challenged dogs, despite the inability to immunize dogs against each of the known CIRD
pathogens. Table 21.2 lists the vaccines available in the
USA for pathogenic viruses and bacteria associated with
CIRD. This vaccination recommendation might be altered
in different parts of the world because of factors such as
incidence or economics.
Several types of vaccine (Tables 21.3 and 21.4) are
available for administration to dogs by the intranasal,
21.1

Figure 21.1 Tetracycline labeling of the enamel in an adult dog
subsequent to extended administration of the antibiotic during
puppyhood.
Table 21.2 Vaccines (available in the USA) for prevention
against known CIRD pathogens.
B. bronchiseptica
Canine parainfluenza virus
Canine adenovirus-2
Canine distemper virus
Canine influenza virus

23/04/16 1:28 pm

912

Multisystemic disorders

Table 21.3 Initial vaccination recommendations for dogs based on the 2011 American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA)
Vaccination Guidelines.
Core vaccines

Administration

First booster

MLV or recombinant distemper +
MLV parvovirus
+ MLV adenovirus-2
(administered as a combination
product)

3 doses are recommended between
6 and 16 weeks of age
Example:
8 weeks, 12 weeks, and 16 weeks
of age

Administer a single dose (of a combination product)
not later than 1 year following the last dose in the
initial series.
Note: A minimum interval of 2 weeks between any
2 doses of vaccine is recommended

Rabies (killed)
(1-year and 3-year products are
available)

Administer a single dose of rabies
vaccine not earlier than 12 weeks
of age
(State/Local/Provincial law applies)

Schedule a second dose of rabies vaccine to be
administered not later than 1 year following
administration of the first dose, regardless of the
dog’s age at the time the initial dose is administered.
(State/Local/Provincial law applies)

Noncore vaccines

Administration

Booster recommendations

B. bronchiseptica + canine
parainfluenza virus (IN only)
(some IN products may also contain
CAV-2 antigen)

When risk of exposure is sustained, administer
Single dose (intranasal) at 12 or
a single dose 1 year following the last dose
16 weeks of age. (Optional: some
administered
authors recommended 2 doses at
12 and 16 weeks of age.)
IN vaccines may be administered as
early as 3 to 4 weeks of age

B. bronchiseptica only (monovalent)
Three options are available:
•• Parenteral (killed-bacterin)
•• IN (avirulent live)
•• Intraoral (avirulent live)

Parenteral (SC): 2 doses are
required, 2–4 weeks apart.
Intraoral: The manufacturer
recommends a single initial dose

When risk of exposure is sustained, administer
a single dose 1 year following the last dose
administered

Leptospirosis
(killed) 4-serovar
(2-way leptospirosis vaccines
are not recommended by either
AAHA or the American College of
Veterinary Internal Medicine)

2 initial doses, 2–4 weeks apart
Note: It is not recommended to
administer the first dose prior to
12 weeks of age.
Note: Small breed dogs: consider
delaying initial doses until the core
vaccine series has been completed

Where risk of exposure is sustained, administer a
single dose 1 year following completion of the initial
2-dose series

Lyme disease
(recombinant or killed)

2 initial doses, 2 to 4 weeks apart
Note: Small breed dogs: consider
delaying initial doses until the core
vaccine series has been completed

Where risk of exposure is sustained, administer a
single dose 1 year following completion of the initial
2-dose series.
Option:
For dogs residing in endemic regions, administration
of the first booster 6 months following completion
of the initial 2-dose series is a reasonable alternative
schedule. An additional booster is recommended at
1 year following completion of the initial series, with
annual vaccination recommended thereafter

Canine influenza virus
(killed)

2 initial doses, 2–4 weeks apart are
required

Manufacturer recommends annual re-vaccination
where risk of exposure is sustained
Duration of immunity has not been established

Canine parainfluenza virus option:
In the USA and Canada, canine
parainfluenza virus vaccine
is commonly administered in
combination with the above
vaccines as DA2PPi (see below)

MLV, modifield live virus; IN, intranasal.
Note: Canine coronavirus vaccination is not recommended.
Note: Crotalus atrox (Western Diamondback rattlesnake) vaccine should only be used in dogs with a defined risk for exposure. Follow
the manufacturer’s recommendations for dosing.

K22463_C021.indd 912

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

Table 21.4 Booster recommendations for adult dogs.
•• After completing the initial series of core ­vaccines
­(distemper + parvovirus + adenovirus-2) it is
­recommended to administer a single dose ­(combination
vaccine) at intervals of every 3 years (or longer).
Note: Substantial data exist to demonstrate that dogs
derive protective immunity for at least 5 years following
administration of modified live virus core vaccines (in the
absence of maternally derived antibody).
•• Rabies boosters. In the USA, all States currently ­recognize
and accept the use of ‘3-year’ rabies vaccine in dogs.
Note: Some local municipalities may mandate stricter
­requirements (annual booster) for rabies vaccination.
•• Noncore vaccines: administer annually where risk of
­exposure is sustained.

oral, and parenteral (subcutaneous) route. The constituents and the routes of administration of commercially
available vaccines vary. The route of vaccine administration indicated by the manufacturer must be strictly
adhered to.
Although not indicated for the prevention of signs of
CIRD in individual pets, doxycycline (5 mg/kg PO q24h
for 5 days) has been empirically administered to all dogs
entering a large animal shelter experiencing high rates
(>50%) of acute-onset cough. Follow-up over a 30-day
period indicated:

●● Rapid and substantial reduction in incidence of CIRD
within the population.

●● Higher placement rates.
●● Reduced euthanasia rates.
●● Lower operating costs.
Anecdotal observations suggest that empirical, daily
administration of a broad-spectrum antibiotic may be
of benefit in managing endemic respiratory disease
associated with bacteria among shelter-housed dogs.
­
While the cost of doxycycline may prohibit ­implementing
programmatic treatment of all dogs entering a ­shelter,
other less expensive, broad-spectrum antibiotics
are ­
available and may augment attempts to reduce
the ­
frequency or severity of CIRD in populations of
co-housed dogs.
Nosodes are liquid homeopathic preparations, sometimes called homeopathic vaccines, containing ­
minute
amounts of infectious material (tissue/discharge) c­ ollected
from actively infected, unvaccinated animals. Intended
for oral administration, proponents of nosodes claim efficacy in not only preventing but also treating infectious
diseases in dogs and cats. Nosodes are not recommended
for the treatment or prevention of CIRD because:

K22463_C021.indd 913

913

●● Values for composition, concentration, and purity of
ingredients are not standardized.

●● Nosodes are not subject to regulatory oversight.
●● No studies have been published documenting either
safety or efficacy.

Public health implications
Human bordetellosis (Bordetella pertussis) is among the
most common respiratory infections of children and
immunocompromised adults and has recently reappeared in children in unusually high numbers. B. bronchiseptica can, in fact, infect the respiratory tract of humans.
Several cases of human B. bronchiseptica pneumonia have
been documented in children and immunocompromised
adults. The risk of transmission from dogs to humans is
considered to be low.
Although human influenza viruses have been
­documented to infect the respiratory tract of dogs, there is
no evidence that CIV is transmitted from dogs to humans.

LYME BORRELIOSIS (BORRELIOSIS; CANINE
LYME DISEASE)
Definition/overview
In the USA, Lyme borreliosis, caused by the spirochete
Borrelia burgdorferi, is the most common vector-borne
disease reported to occur in humans; 300,000 humans are
estimated to be infected annually. Canine Lyme disease is
likely to be among the most common vector-borne diseases
of dogs living in the USA and Canada, although prevalence data are not available.
Similar to the incidence of Lyme borreliosis in
humans, the highest rates of infection in dogs are
reported from the northeastern USA, especially from
Virginia to Southern Maine, the upper Midwest, particularly Wisconsin and eastern Minnesota, and
­northwestern California. However, there are increasing reports of dogs with a positive test for Lyme
­borreliosis living in fringe areas of traditional Lymeendemic regions. Movement of infected ticks by
migratory ground-feeding birds, and possible climatic
changes, are believed responsible for the spread of
canine Lyme disease in the USA and Canada (and in
other countries). In a
­ ddition, positive cases have been
reported in ­geographic regions of the USA (e.g. Denver,
Colorado) where ticks are not present. Such infections
are likely to be associated with pet travel into endemic
regions.
Vector ticks are found throughout Japan, Europe,
and Eurasia, with most documented cases found in
Scandinavian countries and central Europe. Various

23/04/16 1:28 pm

914

Multisystemic disorders

species of Borrelia, in addition to B. burgdorferi, are implicated. These differences may account for the variation in
clinical signs seen in different parts of the world.

Etiology
Lyme borreliosis is a tick-borne infection capable of
affecting a wide spectrum of mammalian and avian
­
hosts. The principal vectors of B. burgdorferi are g
­ enerally
associated with the Ixodes ricinus complex of ticks
(Figure 21.2). The Ixodes species ticks that transmit the
infection have a 2-year life cycle. Infected nymph ticks
are considered the most likely source of infection for
humans. In dogs, the slow-feeding adult tick has been
implicated as the primary source for infection. Although
other tick ­species, fleas, flies, and mosquitoes have been
found to be infected in nature, their role in transmitting
the infection is ­considered to be insignificant.

Pathophysiology
Clinical disease depends on the host’s inflammatory
response to B. burgdorferi, manifested primarily in the
limb joints of affected dogs. Unique biochemical or
hematologic changes have not been associated with
canine Lyme disease. Rarely, dogs will develop an
acute-onset glomerulonephritis, associated with proteinuria, which frequently culminates in death. Cytologic
21.2

Figure 21.2 The Ixodes species of ticks is the vector of
Lyme disease. (From Kassira JP (1997) (ed.) Images in
Clinical Medicine. Selections from the New England Journal
of Medicine, with permission.)

K22463_C021.indd 914

assessment of synovial fluid may show leukocyte
counts from 2,000 to 100,000 nucleated cells/ml, typical
of suppu­rative polyarthritis.

Clinical presentation
Sustained tick attachment and feeding (at least 50 hours)
is required for effective transmission. Infection, however,
is uncommonly associated with development of clinical
signs. Characteristic clinical signs of naturally infected
dogs include: fever, shifting-leg lameness and joint swelling (associated with nonerosive polyarthritis), joint pain,
malaise, and decreased appetite. Generalized illness
might be associated with Lyme nephritis (see below).
In experimentally infected dogs, clinical signs develop
between 2 and 5 months following tick exposure. Clinical
signs may not develop for several months following exposure to ticks. Lameness may manifest in different limbs at
different times throughout infection. It is estimated that
at the time of testing approximately 15–20% of Lymepositive dogs manifest clinical signs of lameness. In practice, it is feasible that nonclinical, but positive, dogs may
eventually develop signs over time. Also, healthy Lymepositive dogs, if untreated, may become reinfected and
more susceptible to manifesting clinical signs.

Lyme nephropathy
A small number of large breed dogs have been reported
to develop acute-onset protein-losing glomerulonephritis attributed to B. burgdorferi infection. Clinical signs are
consistent with acute kidney injury. Treatment is generally not successful.
Lyme nephropathy is a rare, but often fatal, syndrome
associated with B. burgdorferi infection in dogs. This
rapidly progressive renal disease is characterized by
glomerulonephritis, tubular necrosis, and lymphocytic–
plasmacytic interstitial nephritis.
Believed to be an immune-mediated disease,
the pathogenesis of Lyme nephropathy remains
unknown. The most commonly affected breeds include
Labrador Retrievers, Golden Retrievers, and Shetland
Sheepdogs; however, any breed or mixed-breed dog may
be affected.
A critical factor in the diagnosis of Lyme nephropathy
is proteinuria, and assessing every seropositive patient
for proteinuria (including a urine protein:creatinine
[UP:UC] ratio) is an important component of laboratory
evaluation.
In one study, only 30% of affected dogs had been vaccinated for Lyme borreliosis, which suggests that vaccination is not an inciting factor. This highlights the fact

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

that Lyme nephropathy is the consequence of natural
­infection, not vaccination.

Differential diagnosis
Dogs presented for Lyme borreliosis manifest a variety
of clinical signs ranging from, most commonly, acute
lameness and polyarthritis, to an acute-onset febrile
­
illness with nonspecific signs. Rarely, primary renal,
neurologic, dermatologic, or cardiac signs are observed.
Therefore, the differential diagnosis can include other
causes of polyarthropathy, various types of bone infections, and immune–mediated polyarthropathy. An array
of other disorders can be listed in the list of differentials
depending on the particular organ system adversely
affected.

Diagnosis
There are no discrete hematologic or biochemical abnormalities that are diagnostic of canine Lyme disease.
Serologic (antibody) testing is predominantly used in veterinary medicine to diagnose infection. Since the introduction of the first point-of-care ELISA C6 antibody test
(Snap 3Dx® and Snap 4Dx®) several other commercially
available tests have become available.
In veterinary medicine, it must be emphasized that
there is no single pathognomonic diagnostic test for
canine Lyme borreliosis. For over 10 years, point-of-care
tests (Snap4×® and Snap4D× Plus®) have been available
to detect antibodies to the highly conserved C6 peptide of
B. burgdorferi. With high sensitivity and specificity, this
rapid assay is an excellent surveillance tool for identifying dogs that are infected with, not simply ‘exposed’ to,
B. burgdorferi, and is particularly valuable to screen dogs
within areas where Lyme disease is emerging. None of the
commercial Lyme disease vaccines causes f­alse-positive
C6 test results. A positive test, however, cannot be used to
predict the clinical outcome of an infected dog.
Because the majority of dogs infected with
B. ­burgdorferi have no clinical signs at the time of testing,
use of the laboratory-based, quantitative C6 assay (Lyme
Quant C6® Test) has been proposed as a way to monitor
response to treatment of nonclinical seropositive dogs
(see Management).
Another laboratory-based diagnostic test (AccuPlex4®),
introduced in 2012, has the ability to detect five different antibody responses to B. burgdorferi infection (OspA,
OspC, Ospf, p39, and OspF). The test also reportedly differentiates between natural exposure and vaccination as
well as distinguishing early from chronic infection.
Limitations to this testing platform include an
inability to:

K22463_C021.indd 915

915

●● Distinguish acutely infected dogs from those
­vaccinated with a whole-cell (inactivated) vaccine.

●● Reliably distinguish between dogs with a positive
test result for chronic infection (OspF) and those that
have been treated and reinfected.
●● Consistently and reliably detect vaccine-induced
antibody (OspA); therefore, at this time, these results
should not be considered when interpreting a report.
Diagnosis of Lyme borreliosis is based on the presence
of all three of the following factors: (1) positive serology
results (C6, OspC, or OspF); (2) clinical and/or laboratory
findings consistent with Lyme borreliosis; and (3) a reasonable history of exposure to Ixodes species ticks.
The laboratory assessment of any patient found to
have serum antibodies against B. burgdorferi should
include: hematology; serum biochemistry profile; urinalysis; UP:UC ratio to assess proteinuria.
With uncomplicated Lyme borreliosis, hematologic and
biochemical abnormalities are unlikely. However, seropositive dogs are at risk for co-infection with other vector-borne
pathogens and may have underlying laboratory abnormalities (e.g. thrombocytopenia, anemia, hypoalbuminemia).
Positive C6 antibody test results are highly indicative
of infection but are not predictive for development of
clinical signs in healthy dogs. Unlike immunofluorescent
antibody (IFA) testing, prior vaccination does not cause
­false-positive test results for C6 antibody. The quantitative C6 antibody test has been introduced and this may be
useful in assessing the likelihood of clinical signs developing in a healthy dog with a positive ELISA Snap test and
assessing the antibody response to therapy. Treatment of
dogs with a high concentration of C6 antibody (>30 units)
may be indicated. Seropositive dogs and cats can only
be assessed as having seroreactivity to B. burgdorferi.
Diagnostic confirmation is based, instead, on detection
of the organism in culture specimens of tissues or body
fluids. These tests are uncommonly performed in clinical
practice.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Treatment with an oral antimicrobial is indicated in any
patient meeting the above criteria, and oral doxycycline
is the preferred therapeutic approach to canine Lyme
borreliosis. Optional treatment regimens are listed in
Table 21.5. Most authors agree that dogs exhibiting lameness and/or myalgia resulting from B. burgdorferi infection will rapidly improve within 3–5 days.
It is important not to discontinue treatment earlier than recommended, even if clinical signs rapidly

23/04/16 1:28 pm

916

Multisystemic disorders

resolve. Also, although clinical signs may rapidly resolve
with treatment, none of the antimicrobials outlined in
Table 21.5 are known to eliminate B. burgdorferi from
tissue.
Indications for treating the seropositive patient with
no clinical signs or laboratory abnormalities are less
clear than those for treating patients clearly affected by
Lyme disease (see above). While treatment guidelines for
healthy but antibody-positive dogs have not been published, the following options for this particular patient
population can be considered:

●● Response to therapy. One option for monitoring these
dogs is to perform the laboratory-based quantitative
C6 test. Dogs with pretreatment quantitative titers
≥30 U/ml can be monitored for response to treatment
by measuring reduction in C6 antibody concentration
6 months after treatment. Dogs that experience reductions in antibody ≥50% have responded to treatment.
●● Observe nontreated dogs. Because laboratory-based
antibody tests cannot predict clinical disease, conducting routine or quantitative serology is generally
not useful in seropositive patients with no clinical
signs or laboratory abnormalities.
●● Vaccination of seropositive dogs. Because natural
infection does not induce protective immunity, it is
reasonable to recommend vaccination of seropositive
dogs, particularly those living in endemic regions, to
prevent reinfection. If a seropositive dog manifests
clinical signs, vaccination may be given following
­
completion of the recommended treatment period.
If clinical signs are not present, vaccination may be
administered at the time of testing. There is no known
therapeutic value associated with vaccinating a seropositive dog.

Prevention
Despite the fact that infection with B. burgdorferi does not
consistently cause clinical illness, canine Lyme borreliosis is a disease to prevent, not to treat. Prevention consists
of three components.

Limit exposure to ticks
Reducing or eliminating exposure to infected ticks is the
core strategy to preventing canine Lyme borreliosis. Even
in regions where tick exposure is considered minimal,
administration of an oral or topical tick preventive is
critical. The recommendation for widespread practice of
adequate tick control extends beyond the control of Lyme
disease because the same measures will prove beneficial
in preventing an array of other tick-borne diseases.

Vaccinate at-risk dogs
In regions of the USA and Canada known to be endemic
for ticks infected with B. burgdorferi, dogs should be
vaccinated annually. Vaccination is not routinely recommended for dogs living in nonendemic regions (e.g.
Colorado, Utah, New Mexico, western Canada). Instead,
appropriate use of tick preventives reasonably manages
exposure risk.
All vaccines immunize by stimulating antibody to
the OspA antigen, which is ingested by ticks while they
feed (on the dog), binding to spirochetes in the mid-gut
of the ticks and preventing transmission of B. burgdorferi
(Tables 21.3 and 21.4).
Based on results of in-vitro studies, some products
(whole-cell bacterins) claim provision of expanded protection due to the addition of OspC antigen. However,
OspC antibody has not yet demonstrated in-vivo protection against infection when independent from the OspA
antibody.

Table 21.5 Treatment recommendations for dogs with Lyme disease.
Antimicrobial

Dosage

Recommended treatment period

10 mg/kg PO q24h
(or 5 mg/kg PO q12h)

4–6 weeks (1 month minimum)

Minocycline

25 mg/kg PO q24h

4–6 weeks (1 month minimum)

Cefovecin

8 mg/kg SC

2 doses at 14-day interval

Amoxicillin

20 mg/kg PO q8h

1 month (minimum)

Azithromycin

25 mg/kg PO q24h

1 month (minimum)

Preferred treatment
Doxycycline
Optional treatment

K22463_C021.indd 916

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

917

21.3

Avoid at-risk regions
Encourage owners to avoid traveling with their dogs to
regions inhabited by the Ixodes tick. However, if dogs must
travel to, or reside within or in the periphery of, Lyme
endemic regions, especially during periods of increased
tick activity (spring/summer/fall), highly recommend
application of a tick preventive as well as vaccination.

Public health implications
Lyme borreliosis in dogs is not considered to be a source of
infection for humans. Since humans and pets are incidental
hosts for the vector tick, dogs and cats appear to be sentinel
hosts, rather than reservoir hosts, for human infection.

CANINE BOTULISM
Definition/overview
Botulism is a neurologic disorder of dogs and humans
caused by intoxication of botulinum neurotoxin produced
by Clostridium botulinum.

Etiology
Botulism is a neuroparalytic disease; it is not the result
of a bacterial infection. The highly potent neurotoxin is
produced by the gram-positive bacterium C. botulinum.

Pathophysiology
Following ingestion of the preformed toxin, botulinum
toxin binds rapidly and irreversibly to membrane receptors at the neuromuscular junction. Clinical signs are associated with interruption of acetylcholine release, resulting
in lower motor neuron and parasympathetic dysfunction.

Clinical presentation
Initially, affected dogs develop progressive, symmetric
weakness, beginning with the hindlimbs and progressing to the forelimbs (Figure 21.3). Quadriplegia may
result, although a tail wag is maintained. Neurologic
examination characteristically reveals hyporeflexia and
hypotonia. Pain sensation is maintained. Cranial nerve
abnormalities include mydriasis, decreased pupillary
light response, decreased jaw tone, salivation, diminished
palpebral reflexes, and weak vocalization. Mentation is
generally normal. Severely affected dogs may experience
difficulty breathing, associated with decreased muscular
tone. Affected patients appear to have decreased swallowing reflexes and should be considered predisposed to
aspiration pneumonia. Respiratory paralysis or secondary respiratory/urinary tract infections may culminate
in death in a small number of patients.

K22463_C021.indd 917

Figure 21.3 The toxin of Clostridium botulinum can cause
a severe bulbar and lower motor neuron paralysis, causing
impaired respiration and requiring life-preserving ventilatory
support. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Differential diagnosis
Rabies is an important differential among dogs with overt
signs of botulism toxicity. In addition, CNS neoplasia, tetanus, and other forms of poisoning should be considered.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs. Results of laboratory
profiles, including analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF),
are normal. Diagnostic confirmation is based on identification of botulinum toxin in serum, feces, vomitus, or
samples of the suspect food. However, identification of
the C. botulinum organism from feces is not necessarily
diagnostic. In clinical practice, attempts to confirm the
presence of toxins must be coordinated with the laboratory to verify specimen type, volume, and preparation.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
The principal treatment of botulism entails a commitment to extended supportive care. Affected dogs require
assistance in eating, drinking, and moving. Significant
effort is required to prevent the occurrence of decubital sores and to prevent urine and fecal contamination
of skin. Antibiotics should not be routinely utilized in
affected patients unless a secondary bacterial infection is
diagnosed (e.g. aspiration pneumonia).
Antitoxin does not constitute effective therapy when
clinical signs are present, since botulinum toxin is
already bound to membrane receptors. Antitoxin type C
can be administered to asymptomatic dogs suspected of
recent (within 1 hour) ingestion of contaminated food
and ­ongoing intestinal absorption of botulinal toxin.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

918

Multisystemic disorders

Clinical signs may persist for as long as 3 weeks. If
appropriate supportive care can be provided, the prognosis is good and recovery, if it occurs, is complete. Recovery
of head, neck, and forelimb muscle function occurs first,
followed by the hindlimbs.

Prevention
The most important means of preventing botulism is
to prevent access to contaminated food, especially raw
meat. The botulinum toxin is easily destroyed by heating
food to 80°C (176°F) for 30 minutes or to 100°C (212°F) for
10 minutes.

Public health implications
Botulism is not transmitted from dogs to humans.

CANINE BRUCELLOSIS
Definition/overview
Canine brucellosis is the clinical manifestation of infection with Brucella canis, a gram-negative aerobic coccobacillus. Although dogs are susceptible to natural infection
with B. abortus and B. suis following ingestion of contaminated placentas and aborted fetuses of livestock, the
dog does not play a significant role in the transmission
of these infections. However, B. canis is excreted in high
concentrations from vaginal discharges and semen, and
these are the most likely source of infection among dogs.

Etiology
Oronasal contact with aborted material and breathing
are the most likely means of transmitting the infection
among dogs. Seminal fluid and urine of male dogs has
also been incriminated as a source of infection.

Pathophysiology
The ability of B. canis to localize in nonreproductive tissues such as the intervertebral disk is responsible for the
clinical manifestations of B. canis infection (e.g. diskospondylitis). The eyes, kidneys, and meninges may also
be affected subsequent to immune-complex deposition.
Antibody is not protective. Cell-mediated immunity plays
the most important role in protecting against the consequences of infection.

reported in the dead puppies. A brown or greenish-gray
vaginal discharge may persist for up to 6 weeks following
abortion. Failure of conception is commonly reported in
dogs with B. canis infection; however, this is an unreliable
diagnostic sign since numerous causes of failure to conceive exist. Puppies that are born live may demonstrate
generalized peripheral lymphadenomegaly for as long as
4–6 months. Hyperglobulinemia may also be observed.
In adult males, B. canis infection is not frequently
associated with overt clinical signs. Careful examination
may indicate the presence of nonpainful epididymitis.
Testicular enlargement and orchitis are uncommon. In
chronically affected males, testicular atrophy may be
apparent.
Nonreproductive abnormalities associated with
B. canis infection are less common yet are more likely
to be associated with clinical signs. Spinal pain, p
­ aresis,
and even ataxia may occur in dogs with diskospondylitis (Figure 21.4). Osteomyelitis has been reported in
the appendicular skeleton and is associated with lameness. Rarely, anterior uveitis and corneal edema may be
observed alone or in combination with other clinical signs.

Differential diagnosis
Among male dogs, clinical signs of brucellosis are not
likely to be apparent. Among females, vaginitis and/or
open pyometra should be considered. Occasionally, dogs
will present with acute neurologic signs consistent with
intervertebral disk disease or diskospondylitis.

Diagnosis
In adult males and females, laboratory diagnosis of B. canis
infection is usually based on serologic testing. Although
hyperglobulinemia is a common finding among chronically infected dogs, it is not diagnostic. Examination
of semen may reveal abnormalities as early as 5 weeks
post infection. A variety of morphologic abnormalities
(e.g. immature sperm, swollen midpieces, deformed acrosomes) are apparent in the sperm along with aggregates
21.4

Clinical presentation
Among adult females, abortion of dead puppies is the
primary clinical finding in dogs with brucellosis. In
most cases, bitches usually abort between 45 and 60 days
of gestation without other signs of clinical illness.
Subcutaneous edema, congestion, and hemorrhage are

K22463_C021.indd 918

Figure 21.4 Radiograph depicting diskospondylitis in a dog,
which can be caused by Brucella canis.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

of inflammatory cells (neutrophils) and macrophages.
By 20 weeks post infection, more that 90% of sperm are
abnormal. Aspermia may ultimately result.
A variety of serologic tests can be performed to rule a
diagnosis in or out:

●● 2–Mercaptoethanol rapid slide agglutination test

●●

●●

●●

●●

●●

(ME-RSAT) is the recommended initial, in-office
screening test for detection of antibodies. Falsepositive test results are common; however, there is
a good correlation between a negative test and lack
of infection. Therefore, the ME-RSAT is most useful in
identifying patients that do not have brucellosis.
The tube agglutination test (TAT) is commonly used
to confirm infection in dogs with a positive ME-RSAT.
However, lack of availability and diagnostic specificity diminish the value of the TAT as a diagnostic test.
The agar gel immunodiffusion test is the recommended
confirmatory test in dogs found to be positive by the
ME-RSAT or TAT. This test is limited by the number of
laboratories capable of performing the procedure.
Although indirect IFA testing and ELISA assays are
being evaluated as diagnostic tests for B. canis, these
tests are not in widespread use today and may not be
available to most clinicians.
B. canis may be isolated from whole blood cultures in
affected dogs as early as 4 weeks following oronasal
infection. Concurrent or prior antibiotic therapy will
diminish bacterial numbers in blood. Occasionally,
cultures of urine collected by cystocentesis may yield
B. canis.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing of whole
blood samples (not serum) has proven to be more
sensitive than blood culture or serologic testing.
Additionally, PCR testing of vaginal swab samples
may be used to confirm positive test results.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Treatment is difficult owing to the organism’s persistence
within cells. Relapses are therefore common once antimicrobials are discontinued, necessitating repetitive
courses. Combination antimicrobial therapy, especially
dihydrostreptomycin combined with either tetracycline
or minocycline, has consistently been recommended
in the treatment of brucellosis. However, the restricted
availability of dihydrostreptomycin in some countries,
combined with the fact that B. canis is an intracellular
bacterium, makes the successful treatment of canine brucellosis particularly difficult.
Administration of doxycycline (12.5 mg/kg PO q12h
for 4 weeks) or minocycline (same dose as doxycycline)

K22463_C021.indd 919

919

plus streptomycin (20 mg/kg IM q24h on treatment weeks
1 and 4) has provided the best results in experimentally
infected dogs. Recurrence of bacteremia may develop
weeks or months following discontinuation of antibiotic
therapy. Gentamicin (2.5 mg/kg IM or SC q12h on treatment weeks 1 and 4) has been used in lieu of streptomycin when administering combination therapy.
Ocular infection with B. canis is difficult to treat. If
vision has been lost in one eye, enucleation is indicated.
Multiple drug therapy using both topical products (prednisolone, gentamicin, cyclosporine) and oral or parenteral antimicrobials (rifampin, doxycycline, gentamicin,
or a fluoroquinolone) is indicated. Attempts to treat dogs
with CNS infections have not been successful.
In addition to antibiotics, infected pets should be neutered to diminish the chances of infecting other dogs or
humans. Among dogs used in breeding programs, isolation and elimination from the breeding program are
recommended at the time diagnosis is confirmed. Among
those dogs that cannot be maintained as pets, euthanasia
is justified.

Prevention
There is currently no effective vaccine available for preventing B. canis infection in dogs. The risk of infection
is greatest among dogs utilized in breeding programs
or maintained in breeding kennels. Quarantine procedures should be in place in breeding facilities prior to
the admission of new dogs. At least two negative serotests (ME-RSAT or TAT) should be documented at 1-month
intervals prior to entry into a breeding program.

Public health implications
Although the total number of human infections caused
by B. canis is small, canine brucellosis must be regarded
as a zoonotic infection. Both natural and laboratory
acquired infections are reported. Caution should be taken
when handling aborted tissues and discharges from dogs
suspected of having brucellosis.

INFECTIOUS TRACHEOBRONCHITIS
See Viral infections.

LEPTOSPIROSIS
(See also Chapter 12: Nephrology/urology.)

Definition/overview
Leptospirosis is an important clinical and zoonotic disease of worldwide significance known to occur in dogs,

23/04/16 1:28 pm

920

Multisystemic disorders

humans, and many other animal species. Numerous
serovars of Leptospira interrogans have been recognized,
at least 10 of which are considered potentially important for dogs. Serogroups most often implicated in dogs
worldwide include canicola, icterohaemorrhagiae, grippotyphosa, pomona, and bratislava. In the USA, killed vaccines are available for L. canicola, L. ­icterohaemorrhagiae,
L. ­grippotyphosa, and L. pomona. Other vaccine serovars
might be available in different parts of the world.

Etiology
Leptospires are long, flexible, filamentous bacteria.
Over 250 serovars and serogroups of leptospirosis have
been classified; approximately 10 are known to infect
and cause disease in dogs. Leptospirosis is transmitted
to dogs through direct contact with infected urine, bite
wounds, ingestion of infected tissues/fluids, and by venereal and placental transfer. Organisms may be excreted
in the urine of recovered dogs intermittently for several
months following initial infection. The organism is not
known to persist for extended periods in voided urine.
Although cats may develop leptospirosis, the incidence of
infection is much lower than that of the dog and infection
is typically mild or subclinical.

Differential diagnosis
Acute-onset signs associated with leptospirosis may
manifest as any one of several serious systemic illnesses
including acute kidney injury/chronic kidney disease,
acute hepatitis, neoplasia, adverse drug reaction, polyarthritis, myositis (e.g. canine toxoplasmosis), pneumonia,
and spinal cord injury.

Diagnosis
Fever (39.4°–40.0°C [103°–104°F]) associated with shivering and muscle tenderness is among the earliest clinical
signs seen during the acute infection. Leukocytosis and
thrombocytopenia characterize the hematologic abnormalities in canine leptospirosis. Increased serum urea
nitrogen and creatinine associated with varying degrees
of renal failure are commonly encountered. Young
dogs with acute-onset icterus or renal failure should be
21.5

Pathophysiology
Clinical illness is associated with the penetration of leptospires through mucous membranes, with subsequent
spread and replication in other tissues, especially the
kidney, liver, spleen, eyes, and genital tract. Although
clinical signs may be mild, death, associated with disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), can occur rapidly.
Colonization of leptospires in the kidney occurs in most
infected animals. Even following treatment and apparent
clinical recovery, infectious leptospires may be excreted
for several weeks or months in the urine.

Clinical presentation
Leptospirosis occurs most commonly in outdoor adult
dogs, although dogs of any age are susceptible. The severity of infection varies according to age, environment, and
serovar. Acute infections are characterized by fever and
muscle tenderness. Vomiting, weakness, and coagulopathies, with hematemesis, hematochezia, melena, epistaxis,
and petechiation, characterize the clinical picture of DIC.
The most common clinical signs associated with leptospirosis include lethargy, depression, anorexia, and vomiting. A variety of additional clinical signs include weight
loss, nonlocalizing pain, arthralgia, posterior paresis, and
labored breathing. Icterus is more commonly encountered in dogs with acute leptospirosis (Figure 21.5).

K22463_C021.indd 920

Figure 21.5 Bilirubinuria in an icteric dog with
leptospirosis-induced hepatitis. The urine of dogs infected
with leptospirosis can remain infectious for several weeks or
months following clinical recovery.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

considered suspect for leptospirosis. Considering the public health implications of this disease, an effort should be
made to confirm the diagnosis.
In practice, the diagnosis of leptospirosis is typically based on presenting signs and clinician intuition.
Conventional diagnostic tests for leptospirosis require
submission of at least one sample of blood/urine to an
appropriately equipped laboratory. Because results may
require several days to obtain, testing is seldom done. At
the time of writing, efforts to license a rapid, point-of-care
diagnostic test are in progress (see below).
The so-called ‘gold standard’ method of diagnosing
leptospirosis is the microscopic agglutination test (MAT).
This test entails adding serial dilutions of serum to a
known concentration of live organisms. The dilution at
which 50% of spirochetes agglutinate in vitro defines
the titer. Documentation of a rising titer in two samples
3–4 weeks apart is recommended for establishing a diagnosis of leptospirosis. However, due to the rapid onset of
signs in clinically affected dogs, two samples are seldom
submitted from the same patient. Less sensitive, but used
most often, is a single titer where the highest titer considered to be above that caused by vaccine is regarded as
the infecting organism. However, there are shortcomings
to the MAT. Reference ranges for seropositivity, based on
a single sample, can vary among laboratories; interpretation requires subjective assessment of the degree of
agglutination, and cross-reactivity among the various
serovars tested is common. Observation of live spirochetes in fresh urine, evaluated by dark field microscopy,
can confirm infection. However, this test is uncommonly
performed in dogs today.
A growing number of laboratories are able to perform
PCR testing on blood (for acute disease) and fresh urine
(carrier state) on dogs suspected as having leptospirosis.
Most laboratories request that both blood and urine be
submitted on individual patients and that samples are
express mailed to the laboratory.
An ELISA-based assay to detect Leptospira antibody in
blood is currently available (Idexx Laboratories). At the
time of writing, samples must be submitted to a designated
laboratory for testing. Results are reported to be available
within 48 hours. In the near future, a rapid, point-of-care
assay is expected to become available for in-hospital testing of dogs suspected of having leptospirosis. Antibody
tests do not distinguish among various serogroups.
Postmortem examination of tissues does not guarantee ready confirmation of diagnosis. Although it is possible to culture leptospires from fresh, macerated kidney,
the number of organisms present in the tissue is low and
identification can be difficult.

K22463_C021.indd 921

921

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Dogs with clinical signs associated with leptospirosis
require hospitalization and intensive supportive therapy. Fluid replacement with polyionic IV-administered
fluids should be used to correct deficits associated with
vomiting and diarrhea. In animals with spontaneous
­
bleeding, plasma or fresh whole blood transfusions are
indicated. Low-dose heparin administration is indicated for dogs considered to have DIC. Osmotic diuretics (e.g. mannitol) may be required after euhydration is
restored and any co-existing hypotension is corrected
in oliguric patients (<2 ml of urine produced/kg/hour).
Failure to induce diuresis with osmotic diuretics justifies
administration of dopamine (5 µg/kg/minute IV) or furosemide (2–6 mg/kg IV).
Antibiotic therapy should begin immediately. Today,
doxycycline (5 mg/kg PO or IV q12h for up to 3 weeks)
is the preferred antimicrobial treatment for dogs with
leptospirosis. Doxycycline has been recommended for
the treatment of both the initial phase of infection and
the carrier state. Doxycycline is primarily excreted in the
feces and can be administered to dogs in renal failure.
Alternative
antimicrobials
include:
amoxicillin (22 mg/kg PO q8–12h for 2 weeks) or penicillin G
(25,000–40,000 U/kg SC or IV q12h for 2 weeks). Penicillin
does not eliminate the carrier state. Aminoglycosides
are strictly c­ontraindicated in dogs with renal disease
associated with leptospirosis. Ampicillin, first-genera­
tion ­cephalosporins, and chloramphenicol have not been
effective.
The prognosis for dogs with clinical leptospirosis is
highly variable. Dogs with acute onset of clinical signs
associated with icterus and DIC have a poor prognosis.
Dogs with subacute leptospirosis, with evidence of mild
renal disease, have a fair prognosis for recovery if treatment is instituted early and maintained for a minimum
of 2 weeks.

Prevention
Killed leptospiral bacterins are available for L. canicola,
L. icterohaemorrhagiae, L. grippotyphosa, and L. pomona
(Table 21.3). With little exception, the current vaccines
do not provide cross-protection against other disease-­
pro­
ducing serovars recognized in dogs. Vaccination
against leptospirosis is indicated in dogs considered to be
at risk of exposure. Veterinarians recommending leptospirosis vaccine should only administer a four-serogroup
vaccine. Annual administration of booster vaccines to
adult dogs deemed to be at risk of exposure is indicated.
When vaccination of puppies is indicated, two doses are

23/04/16 1:28 pm

922

Multisystemic disorders

recommended 3–4 weeks apart, beginning at not less
than 12 weeks of age. It should be noted that leptospirosis
bacterins are often associated with acute adverse events,
especially in small breed dogs (<10 kg [22 lb] body weight)
and in dogs <12 weeks of age.

Public health implications
Contaminated urine of dogs with leptospirosis is
infectious for humans and other susceptible animal
­
species. Individuals who must handle dogs considered
to be suspect for leptospirosis should wear latex gloves
at all times, particularly when handling urine or urinecontaminated items. Floors and cages contaminated with
urine of dogs with leptospirosis should be washed with a
detergent and treated with an iodine-based disinfectant.
Most cases of human leptospirosis, however, occur subsequent to occupational, recreational, or avocational activities. Seasonal flooding, rather than contact with dogs, is
recognized as a major risk factor for human leptospirosis.

TETANUS
Definition/overview
Clostridium tetani is a gram-positive, anaerobic,
spore-forming bacillus capable of producing a potent
neurotoxin subsequent to the introduction of spores into
wounds. In contrast to horses and humans, dogs are considered to be several hundred times more resistant to the
effects of tetanus toxin; cats are considered to be approximately 12 times more resistant to tetanus toxin than
dogs. As a result of this natural resistance, the prevalence
of tetanus in dogs and cats is low.

Etiology
Resistant spores of C. tetani can be found in the environment, particularly in rich soil. Spores enter the body
through contaminated wounds.

Tetanus in dogs can be characterized as localized or
generalized. Localized tetanus occurs more commonly in
dogs (and less often in cats). Stiffness usually begins in
the limb closest to the wound site. Gradually, the opposite
extremity becomes involved. With time, localized tetanus
can become generalized.
Extreme muscle rigidity, a stiff gait, or an inability
to walk characterizes generalized tetanus (Figure 21.6).
Extreme body temperature can result from excessive
muscular activity. The patellar reflex may be accentuated
but, because of muscle stiffness, may be difficult to assess.
In advanced stages of the disease, enophthalmos and
protrusion of the third eyelid will develop. The ears are
typically held erect, the lips are drawn, and the forehead
appears wrinkled. Hypertonus of masticatory muscles is
responsible for trismus (also called ‘lockjaw’).
Affected dogs and cats are particularly reactive to tactile or auditory stimulation. Opisthotonus or generalized
convulsions may develop subsequent to even mild provocation. Pain and hyperthermia associated with muscle
spasms justify the use of muscle relaxants in managing
affected patients.

Differential diagnosis
Muscle rigor and conformational changes associated with
localized and generalized tetanus are characteristic of the
disease. Differential diagnoses that should be considered
include rabies and trauma, particularly trauma involving
the CNS.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of tetanus is based on the history of a recent
wound and clinical signs. Physical evidence of a wound
or skin penetration may not be apparent on physical
21.6

Pathophysiology
The neurotoxin produced by the C. tetani spores binds
irreversibly to inhibitory interneurons of the brain and
spinal cord, where it prevents the release of glycine
and gamma-aminobutyric acid. Recovery from tetanus
depends on the development of new axon terminals.

Clinical presentation
Evidence of localized or general muscle stiffness characteristically develops within 5–10 days from the onset
of wounding. In cats, however, the onset of signs may be
delayed for up to 3 weeks because of their inherent resistance to the neurotoxin.

K22463_C021.indd 922

Figure 21.6 Generalized tetanus in this 5-month-old Airedale
is characterized by profound limb and neck rigidity, erect ears,
and trismus.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

examination. Neutrophilic leukocytosis with a left shift
may be the only hematologic abnormality present. Creatine
kinase may be particularly elevated in animals with generalized muscle spasms. Although serum antibody titers
to tetanus toxin have been used to document a diagnosis,
this test has limited value in clinical practice. In addition,
attempting to isolate C. tetani from a wound infection is
not recommended as a diagnostic procedure. The ­organism
is present in low numbers and must be grown under strict
anaerobic conditions for as long as 12 days.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Once clinical signs of tetanus have developed, treatment centers around providing intensive supportive
care until clinical signs resolve. In patients that develop
generalized tetanus, treatment may entail 3–4 weeks of
­hospitalization in a facility capable of providing 24-hour
a day care.
The following elements of intervention and supportive
care are recommended in patients with tetanus:

●● Antitoxin. Antitetanus equine serum, administered
IV, is recommended in patients identified during the
earliest stages of clinical signs associated with tetanus. Antitoxin is able to neutralize only unbound
toxin or toxin that has yet to be formed. Because antitoxin is associated with anaphylaxis, 0.1 ml of antitoxin should be administered SC or intradermally
15–30 minutes prior to IV administration. Antitoxin
hypersensitivity is indicated by the development
of a wheal at the site of injection; false test results
are known to occur. Affected patients should be pretreated with a glucocorticoid or an antihistamine
prior to administration of the IV dose.
●● Antimicrobial therapy. Penicillin G and metronidazole are indicated for the treatment of C. tetani
­infection. Penicillin G may be given at doses ranging
from 20,000 to 100,000 U/kg IV, IM, or SC q6–12h for at
least 10 days. Although preferred over penicillin G,
metronidazole must be administered IV or PO at 10
mg/kg q8h for at least 10 days.
●● Muscle relaxation. Pentobarbital (or an adequate
alternative anesthetic drug) may be administered
­
(3–15 mg/kg IV q2–6h depending on response). It
is not unusual to continue this level of sedation
throughout the period that clinical signs are manifest. Alternatively, phenothiazines are especially
helpful in controlling the hyperexcitable state.
Chlorpromazine (0.5–2.0 mg/kg IV or PO q8–12h) may
be used alone or with barbiturates. Narcotics are not
indicated in the treatment of dogs with tetanus.

K22463_C021.indd 923

923

●● Surgery. Careful evaluation and débridement of any
obvious wound is indicated in patients with tetanus.
The author has encountered cases in which dogs had
become impaled on sticks, resulting in rapid-onset
localized tetanus. Prompt removal of foreign material from infected wounds is clearly indicated and
may result in rapid resolution of clinical signs.
●● Supportive care. The most critical issue in managing any patient with tetanus is the time and ability
to a
­dminister long-term supportive care. Affected
patients must be maintained in an area where
noise suppression is possible and soft ­
bedding
can be ­
provided to prevent decubital sores. Oral
­hyperalimentation is necessary since most animals
cannot prehend or s­wallow. Animals being tube fed
are at risk of developing a
­ spiration pneumonia. In
addition, constant ­
­
management of urine and feces
to prevent c­ontamination and i­rritation of skin is
required. Patients with generalized tetanus are particularly susceptible to hyperthermia associated with
muscle spasm. The a
­bility to provide sedation and
muscle relaxation over a 24-hour period, for as long
as 2–4 weeks, is imperative. Hiatal hernia and megaesophagus have been reported in animals with tetanus.
Further ­complications such as rhabdomyolysis-­induced
acute kidney injury, sepsis, and respiratory distress
associated with laryngeal spasm are possible.
The prognosis for patients with tetanus is directly related
to the degree of systemic involvement. Dogs with tetanus
that is localized to a peripheral limb have a commensurately better prognosis than those with generalized tetanus. The extended duration of treatment and associated
costs of that treatment may be significant limiting factors.

Prevention
Although tetanus toxoid is available, it is generally administered as treatment to those animals with acute-onset
signs. The natural resistance of dogs and cats to tetanus
does not justify routine vaccination.

Public health implications
Tetanus in dogs and cats is not a zoonotic disease.

VIRAL INFECTIONS
ADENOVIRUS-1 INFECTIONS (INFECTIOUS
CANINE HEPATITIS)
Definition/overview
CAV-1, the cause of infectious canine hepatitis (ICH), is one
of two adenoviruses capable of causing clinical illness in
dogs; it has a worldwide distribution. CAV-1 is genetically

23/04/16 1:28 pm

924

Multisystemic disorders

distinct from CAV-2, one of the causative agents in the
infectious tracheobronchitis complex. CAV-1 is a resilient
virus capable of existing outside of the host, at room temperature, for periods of days to months.

Etiology
CAV-1 is transmitted among dogs, particularly among
those under 1 year of age, by oronasal contamination. After
replicating in the tonsils, regional lymph nodes, and lymphatics, viremia quickly develops. The virus ­principally
targets liver and vascular endothelial cells, although the
kidney and eye are typically affected as well. Although
virus may persist in the kidney for several months post
infection, urine contamination does not appear to be an
important source of infection for susceptible dogs.

Pathophysiology
Subsequent to exposure, transient viremia is associated
with rapid dissemination of the virus. The cytotoxic
effects of the virus are most pronounced in the liver,
kidney, and eye. There appears to be a good correlation
between ­
antibody titer and protection from infection.
However, dogs determined to be immune to CAV-1 challenge are still considered susceptible to respiratory infection caused by CAV-2. On the other hand, dogs that are
immune to CAV-2 are protected against CAV-1 infection.
Pyelonephritis, chronic hepatitis, DIC, anterior uveitis,
and corneal edema may be observed independently from
other clinical signs.

Clinical presentation
Although CAV-1 has a worldwide distribution, confirmed
CAV-1 infection is regarded as an uncommon to rare
infection among dogs in the USA today. Although infections are most likely to occur in dogs younger than 1 year
of age, the most severe infections occur in dogs from birth
to 3 weeks of age. The disease rapidly progresses to death
within hours following the onset of signs.
Initial clinical findings include fever, tachycardia,
enlarged tonsils, coughing associated with bronchopneumonia, and cervical lymphadenopathy commonly associated with edema of the head and neck. Despite its name,
ICH is not characteristically associated with icterus.
Clouding of the cornea and evidence of anterior uveitis
generally develop during clinical recovery.

Differential diagnosis
Poisoning, especially among fatal cases, pneumonia, lymphoma, sepsis, leptospirosis, and acute hepatitis associated with icterus.

K22463_C021.indd 924

Diagnosis
Leukopenia, with lymphopenia and neutropenia, and
thrombocytopenia are characteristic hematologic findings in acutely infected dogs. Liver enzymes (ALT, AST,
and serum AP) are variably increased during the acute
viremic stage of the disease. Coagulation defects consistent with DIC are possible.
On postmortem examination, dogs that have died of
acute ICH will typically manifest edema and hemorrhage of
superficial lymph nodes and subcutaneous tissue, particularly in the area of the neck. Examination of the abdominal
contents reveals petechiae, and ecchymotic hemorrhages
are commonly seen on all serosal surfaces. The gallbladder
is characteristically thickened and edematous. Icterus is
uncommon. Ocular lesions characteristic of anterior uveitis and corneal opacification (edema) may also be present.
Diagnostic confirmation of the acutely infected dog
is based on virus isolation. Since the kidney is the most
persistent site of virus localization, CAV-1 is likely to be
isolated from urine for at least 6 months following initial infection in dogs that survive the acute infection.
Alternatively, cytologic examination of hepatic aspirates
or impressions of hepatic biopsies are most likely to
reveal the presence of inclusion bodies.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Specific antiviral therapy is not available for ICH,
­therefore supportive treatment in the form of IV fluid
therapy, management of DIC, and administration of IV
glucose to counter the effects of hypoglycemia is indicated. Animals that recover from the acute phase of the
disease are at some degree of risk for developing chronic
hepatic fibrosis.
The prognosis for ICH in puppies is poor, since the virus
can be spread through contact with infectious secretions,
contaminated feeding utensils, or hands. The infection
is readily transmitted to susceptible puppies following
exposure.

Prevention
Commercially available CAV-2 vaccines, for parenteral
administration only, are recommended for routine use in
vaccination protocols (Tables 21.3 and 21.4). It should be
noted that a CAV-2 vaccine is currently offered in combination with B. bronchiseptica and canine parainfluenza
for intranasal (mucosal) administration. However, when
administered by the intranasal route, CAV-2 vaccine provides protection against respiratory infections only and
is not intended to protect against CAV-1.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

Public health implications
Canine adenoviruses do not pose a risk to human health.

CANINE INFLUENZA
(See also Canine infectious respiratory disease.)

Definition/overview
Canine influenza is a highly contagious viral respiratory
infection of dogs first described as a clinical disease in a
racing Greyhound kennel in Florida in 2005. Mortality
among infected dogs is low. While clinical infections have
only recently been described, serologic studies suggest that
canine infections may have been present for several years.

Etiology
It has been confirmed that canine influenza resulted from
interspecies transmission of an entire equine influenza A
(H3N8) virus (documented as a cause of equine respiratory disease for over 40 years) to the dog (i.e. the virus
sequence corresponds with the H3 hemaglutinin and the
N8 neuraminidase subtype). Sequence analyses of virus
isolated from lung tissue of Greyhounds that died from
hemorrhagic bronchopneumonia in 2003 indicated that
viruses had infected Greyhounds prior to 2004. Further
studies comparing the equine and canine influenza
viruses have shown that only four amino acid changes
differentiate the equine and canine viruses.

Pathophysiology
Following infection, canine influenza virus concentrates
in epithelium of the lower respiratory tract, including the trachea and bronchi. Pulmonary edema and
­congestion develop, with subsequent suppurative (secondary ­
bacterial) bronchopneumonia. Necrosis of epithelial cells lining the trachea and bronchial glands is
reported. The virus may also cause lymphocytic or neutrophilic ­rhinitis. Viral shedding is limited to 7–10 days
post infection.

Clinical presentation
In January 2005, an outbreak of respiratory disease
occurred in 22 racing Greyhounds at a Florida racetrack.
Two clinical syndromes were reported: a mild cough,
with fever, lasting 10–14 days with subsequent recovery
(14 dogs); and peracute death associated with extensive
lower respiratory tract hemorrhage (eight dogs [36%])
involving the lungs, mediastinum, and pleural space.
The incubation period in dogs is 2–5 days after exposure before clinical signs appear. Infected dogs may shed

K22463_C021.indd 925

925

virus for 7–10 days from the initial day of clinical signs.
Nearly 20% of infected dogs will not display clinical signs
and these will become the silent shedders and spreaders
of the infection. Histology of the lungs revealed suppurative bronchopneumonia as well as bronchiolitis and
tracheitis. Since then sporadic reports of infection, predominantly from dogs housed in animal shelters, have
occurred. At the time of writing, enzootic infections are
not being reported.

Differential diagnosis
Apparently, many dogs with H3N8 infection are subclinical. Those that do develop clinical disease are most likely
to present with signs consistent with infectious tracheobronchitis (‘kennel cough’). More severely affected dogs
could present with signs of pneumonia similar to those
associated with CDV infection, deep mycoses, or bacterial
pneumonia.

Diagnosis
No point-of-care rapid assay is available for the diagnosis of canine influenza. Because clinical signs are vague
and easily confused with other causes of lower respiratory disease, clinical diagnosis of recent infection is
predicated on documenting a ≥four-fold rise in antibody
titer over a 2–4 week period. A single, positive titer only
denotes prior exposure. PCR and antigen-capture ELISA
tests are available, but samples must be collected during
the 7–10 days following infection. Beyond that period,
viral shedding likely to have ended.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Treatment for dogs with a cough, with or without nasal
discharge, entails isolation from other dogs for at least
7–10 days, exercise restriction until the cough subsides, and supportive antimicrobial therapy to prevent
secondary bacterial respiratory infection. Intensive
­therapy is indicated for dogs with clinical pneumonia.
Supplemental oxygen therapy is indicated, as is IV fluid
and antimicrobial therapy. Combination antibiotic therapy (e.g. ­ampicillin + clindamycin) is indicated to provide
maximum coverage against a wide range of opportunistic bacteria. The addition of a bronchodilator in patients
with bacterial pneumonia is controversial. If available,
methylxanthine bronchodilators such as extended
release theophylline preparations (5–10 mg/kg PO q18–
24h) have been advocated as needed. Nebulization and
coupage are also recommended. However, effective nebulization requires use of equipment that will deliver water

23/04/16 1:28 pm

926

Multisystemic disorders

particles between 0.5 and 3.0 micrometers. Vaporizers
and humidifiers are not adequate.

are especially difficult to distinguish from other causes of
infectious enteritis (e.g. canine parvovirus [CPV]).

Prevention

Differential diagnosis

Inactivated (killed) CIV vaccines are currently available. Vaccination does not prevent infection nor shedding of virus following exposure. However, vaccination
will mitigate the severity of disease and decreases the
period of virus shedding among exposed/infected dogs.
Considering the relatively low prevalence of clinical
disease, the need for administering vaccine will likely
depend on defined risk of exposure. Dogs considered to
be at greatest risk for exposure to CIV are those housed in
animal shelters, boarding facilities, dog day-care centers,
pet stores, and dog shows.

CCV infection can mimic several causes of mild enteritis of puppies associated with soft stool (e.g. intestinal
parasites, dietary indiscretion, and food intolerance).
Canine rotavirus is a reasonable differential diagnosis,
although confirmation of infection is difficult to establish. Any puppy with acute-onset diarrhea, with or without vomiting, should be evaluated for CPV infection.
Affected puppies should be examined for the presence of
intussusception.

Public health implications
Although human influenza viruses have been recovered
from dogs and cats, CIV is not considered to represent a
threat to human health.

CANINE CORONAVIRUS

Diagnosis
Confirmation of CCV infection is based on isolation of
the virus in fresh feces or visual evidence of virus using
electron microscopy. Such testing is limited to experienced laboratories capable of performing these tests. On
histopathology, small intestinal lesions of CCV infection
21.7

Definition/overview
Canine coronavirus (CCV) is a single-stranded RNA virus
that has been associated with outbreaks of diarrhea in
young dogs. Dogs of all ages are susceptible, but the clinical disease is more likely to become apparent in puppies
under 6 weeks of age. Although CCV is highly contagious
and capable of spreading rapidly among susceptible dogs,
the overall incidence of disease is considered to be low.
Furthermore, the severity of clinical signs is limited to
mild, transient enteritis.

Etiology
CCV is transmitted among young dogs by the fecal–oral
route; contamination of the environment is the primary
source of exposure.

Pathophysiology
The virus penetrates enterocytes located on villus tips.
The incubation period is 1–4 days.

Clinical presentation
A clinical diagnosis of CCV enteritis is based on a history
of acute-onset diarrhea in young dogs, especially puppies
(Figure 21.7). Feces are described as orange in color and
malodorous, and may contain blood. Only in the most
severe cases will dehydration and electrolyte imbalances
follow. Infected dogs will occasionally develop vomiting.
However, the clinical signs associated with CCV infection

K22463_C021.indd 926

Figure 21.7 Diarrhea is a common sign of canine coronavirus
infection. (Courtesy Pfizer Ltd.)

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

are classically described as atrophy and fusion of intestinal villi, with deepening of the intestinal crypt. Recently,
PCR testing has become commercially available to private
practices. However, considering that CCV is such a minor
pathogen in the spectrum of agents causing infectious
diarrhea in dogs, the value of diagnostic test results may
not be relevant.

Etiology

Management
Treatment/prognosis

Pathophysiology

Supportive therapy is the mainstay of treatment. CCV
infection inconsistently causes clinical disease. When
present, disease is typically mild and self-limiting. In the
worst cases, electrolyte and fluid replacement is indicated
to counter the effects of fluid loss and dehydration, acidosis, and rarely shock. In most cases, therapeutic intervention is not required. The prognosis for recovery without
treatment is excellent.

Prevention
Although both killed and modified live CCV ­vaccines are
currently available, their effectiveness in p
­reventing
disease in dogs has been questioned. Parenterally
­
administered vaccines do not eliminate replica­
tion of CCV in the intestine subsequent to challenge.
Furthermore, the value of vaccinating adult animals
is limited by the fact that natural resistance to the disease occurs with age. Since 2003, canine vaccination
guidelines have ­recommended against the routine use of
coronavirus ­vaccine in pet dogs as well as dogs housed in
shelters.

Public health implications
CCV is not zoonotic.

927

Canine papillomatosis is a benign mucocutaneous
tumor caused by infectious papillomavirus. The highly
­species-specific virus is responsible for the development
of large papillomas (also called warts or verruca vulgaris)
in and around the mouth. The virus is transmissible to
other dogs.

The tumors induced by COPV are the result of infection of
the basal cells of the stratum germinativum, which leads
to acanthosis and hyperkeratosis. The incubation period
ranges from 4–8 weeks following infection. Tumors typically persist for 1–5 months, after which they undergo
spontaneous regresssion.

Clinical presentation
Diagnosis of infectious papillomatosis is based on physical examination findings and the clinical history. The
disease is most likely to occur in young dogs, while the
tissues most likely to be affected are the oral mucosa,
labial margins, and tongue (Figure 21.8). Less commonly affected are the palate, pharynx, epiglottis, and
esophagus. Alternatively, individual eyelid papillomas
may develop on the margin of the eyelids of one or both
eyes. Associated signs include halitosis, hypersalivation, minor bleeding of affected tissue, and discomfort.
Trauma to proliferating tumors caused by toenails and
teeth may actually serve to spread the tumors within
and around the oral cavity. Secondary oral ulceration
and infection may develop. Dogs experiencing high
tumor concentration or a particularly large tumor may
find it difficult or painful to eat and, consequently,
become malnourished.

CANINE ORAL PAPILLOMA INFECTION
(PAPILLOMATOSIS)

21.8

(See also Chapter 18: Dermatologic disorders.)

Definition/overview
The canine oral papillomavirus (COPV) is a large DNA
virus unique to the dog. Although humans, cattle, and
even cats have been reported with viral papillomas,
viruses belonging to this family are considered to be
species specific. COPV is associated with the develop­
ment of benign, transmissible tumors involving the
head, oral cavity, and eyelids. Dogs 2 years of age and
younger appear to be most susceptible. There is no sex
or breed predilection. Malignant transformation of
­papillomavirus-induced tumors is extremely rare.

K22463_C021.indd 927

Figure 21.8 Advanced viral oral papillomatosis in a young
Dobermann.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

928

Multisystemic disorders

Differential diagnosis

Etiology

Benign and malignant oral neoplasms (e.g. epulides,
fibroma, hemangioma, hemangiopericytoma, and
histiocytoma).

Animals infected with CDV readily transmit the disease
through infectious microdroplets or, less often, by aerosol. Among vaccinated populations, CDV is particularly
rare. In unvaccinated populations, however, CDV poses a
significant health threat, particularly to dogs between 3
and 6 months of age as maternal antibody concentration
wanes. Unvaccinated dogs of all ages are susceptible.

Diagnosis
Diagnostic confirmation of papillomatosis is based on
biopsy and gross appearance of these benign tumors.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
In most cases the virus-induced tumor burden is not
sufficiently large to warrant treatment. Spontaneous
­regression of tumors is common by 1–5 months following their initial appearance. It is not known why these
tumors spontaneously regress or how they spread.
Occasionally, surgical excision, cryosurgery, or electrosurgery is indicated to remove large oral tumors. It has been
reported that simply crushing 5–15 of the tumors may
provoke ­spontaneous regression and, thereby, shorten
the course of disease. The use of systemic and lesional or
intralesional treatment with chemotherapeutic agents
­
has not been uniformly effective in dogs. The prognosis for recovery is excellent without specific therapeutic
intervention.

Prevention
There is currently no licensed biological agent for
use in dogs to prevent canine viral papillomatosis.
Experimentally, a recombinant vaccine has demonstrated
protection against viral challenge, but prospects for a
commercial vaccine are unknown. Most dogs develop natural resistance to infection by 2 years of age.

Public health implications
COPV is unique to the dog and, as such, presents no risk
to human health.

CANINE DISTEMPER VIRUS (DISTEMPER,
‘HARD-PAD DISEASE’)
Definition/overview
CDV, recognized worldwide, is a single-stranded RNA
virus that belongs to the genus Morbillivirus. The virus
is relatively unstable at room temperature. It is especially susceptible to ultraviolet light, drying, and
temperatures >50–60°C (122–140°F). At freezing tem­
peratures the virus is reported to survive for several
weeks. Most r­outine ­disinfection procedures effectively
destroy CDV.

K22463_C021.indd 928

Pathophysiology
The initial infection of CDV begins as the virus invades
the epithelium of the upper respiratory tract. The virus
spreads quickly to local lymphatics, tonsils, and bronchial lymph nodes. Subsequently, CDV spreads to epithelial and CNS tissues within the first week of infection. The
humoral immune response following infection correlates
with clearance of the virus. Dogs that recover from acute
CDV infection are likely to derive several years of immunity as a result. Dogs that fail to mount a significant
immune response experience rapid spread of the virus to
the skin, the exocrine and endocrine glands, and the GI,
respiratory, and genitourinary tracts.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of CDV infection range from mild to severe,
depending on virus strain, environmental factors, and
the individual patient’s response to the infection. Clinical
signs may be limited to the upper respiratory tract,
therefore coughing and nasal discharge may be present.
Unvaccinated puppies are most susceptible to severe systemic signs such as pneumonia, diarrhea, dehydration,
and anorexia. Vomiting is a common finding in the early
stages of infection. If complicated by the presence of intestinal parasites, puppies may develop intussusception.
Neurologic signs typically begin 1–3 weeks following recovery from the acute illness. Neurologic signs
associated with CDV infection are characteristically progressive, resulting in rapid deterioration (Figure 21.9).
Patients that survive the neurologic disease may experience permanent complications (seizures, vestibular disease, tetraparesis, and myoclonus). Enamel hypoplasia
(Figure 21.10) may develop if CDV infection occurs prior
to the eruption of permanent teeth.
Additional clinical signs include anterior uveitis and
optic neuritis (associated with sudden-onset blindness),
as well as retinal degeneration and necrosis involving
both the tapetal and nontapetal fundus. On funduscopic
examination, chronic inactive retinal lesions are seen as
hyperreflective areas in the tapetum, often called ‘gold
medallion lesions’ (Figure 21.11). CDV infection in young

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

21.9

Figure 21.9 A 3-year-old unvaccinated Pointer presented with
acute-onset seizures followed by progressive neurologic signs
and eventual coma.
21.10

929

dogs has been associated with metaphyseal osteosclerosis
of the long bones. CDV RNA transcripts have been identified in bone lesions of dogs with hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HOD). These finding have raised concern over the
association between HOD and the use of modified live
virus (MLV) distemper vaccines.
The absence of a reliable antemortem test for CDV dictates that a clinical diagnosis be predicated on the basis
of clinical signs and history. Dogs with severe illness have
the most characteristic clinical features of CDV infection.
However, mild clinical illness caused by CDV may be limited to respiratory or ocular disease, making a clinical
diagnosis of distemper difficult.

Differential diagnosis
While a rare disease among vaccinated dogs, canine distemper is associated with a complex array of clinical signs,
depending on the individual animal. Alternative diseases
to consider include, most importantly, rabies, pneumonia
(a common secondary event), B. bronchiseptica infection,
idiopathic epilepsy, hypoglycemia, CNS trauma, and renal
failure.

Diagnosis
Hematologic changes described in experimental CDV
infection, including lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia,
and regenerative anemia, are not consistently seen
in clinical cases. Occasionally during acute infections
it is possible to demonstrate distemper inclusions in
stained peripheral blood smears (especially lymphocytes and, occasionally, granulocytes) (Figure 21.12).
Examination of buffy coat smears and bone marrow aspirates may increase the chances of detecting inclusions. In

Figure 21.10 Enamel hypoplasia in a 1-year-old dog that
recovered from CDV infection at 3–4 months of age.
21.11

21.12

Figure 21.11 Hyperreflective tapetum in a dog that recovered
from CDV infection.

Figure 21.12 Distemper inclusion body (arrow) in a peripheral
blood neutrophil collected from a dog with acute CDV infection.

K22463_C021.indd 929

23/04/16 1:28 pm

930

Multisystemic disorders

addition, inclusion bodies may be identified in ­cytologic
preparations of conjunctival epithelium. (Note: CDV
­
inclusions are best elucidated in blood films stained with
a quick Romanowski-type stain [e.g. Diff-Quik®]. Inclusion
bodies in blood films stained with conventional Wright’s
stain may not be visible.)
Examination of CSF may reveal an increased intracranial pressure causing a rapid flow rate of CSF, increased
protein concentration (>0.25 g/l [25 mg/dl]), and lymphocytes. These changes are characteristic of, but not unique
to, CDV encephalomyelitis. Distemper-specific IgG in the
CSF may be used to diagnose CDV infection. Vaccineinduced CDV antibody is not normally detected in CSF.
Although other diagnostic tests for CDV infection have
been described (immunocytology, the use of ELISA to
detect serum IgG and IgM antibodies, and virus isolation),
special facilities and sample preparation are required.
Within households where CDV infection is suspected
and other dogs are at risk, postmortem examination is
the most effective means of confirming CDV infection.
Emphasis should be placed on evaluation of the white
matter in both the cerebrum and cerebellum.
Real-time PCR technology is commercially available
for the detection of CDV RNA. Samples can be submitted
as whole blood, serum, pharyngeal swabs, or CSF. Results
may be available within 1–3 days. However, it is important
to understand that the exceptional sensitivity of PCR technology may limit the diagnostic value of the assay. Dogs
recently vaccinated (MLV vaccine) may have false-positive
test results. Also, there is concern that, at least in some
dogs able to overcome infection, the RNA detected may
not define live, replicating (or infectious) virulent virus.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Treatment is nonspecific and supportive. The absence of
specific anti-CDV therapy dictates that treatment is limited to providing supportive care throughout the course of
the acute infection. There is no known treatment modality
that will alter the eventual course of the disease. Treatment
is centered around managing secondary bacterial respiratory infection and conjunctivitis. In addition, provision of parenteral fluids and calories may be indicated.
Management of neurologic signs associated with canine
distemper is limited to anticonvulsant therapy. Variable
success has been achieved in managing neurologic signs
in some dogs with a single dose of dexamethasone. The
extent of progression of clinical signs becomes the limiting
factor in the prognosis of dogs with CDV infection. Once
neurologic signs become evident, the prognosis is commensurately poor and euthanasia is frequently justified.

K22463_C021.indd 930

Prevention
Highly effective modified live and recombinant
­(canarypox vectored) CDV vaccines are available. These
products have an excellent safety record and are considered to be highly efficacious. While most manufacturers recommend three doses of vaccine between 6 and
16 weeks of age, the duration of immunity (DOI) following
the initial booster vaccination (1 year following the last
of the initial series inoculations) has been documented
to persist for at least 5 years. Current guidelines recommend triennial administration of booster vaccine in
adult dogs. Furthermore, dogs recovering from natural
infection are expected to be immune for several years.
Rarely, dogs vaccinated with the Rockborn strain of CDV
have been reported to develop post-vaccinal encephalitis. Furthermore, postvaccinal encephalitis has been
reported in neonatal puppies subsequent to the vaccination of pregnant dogs at or near parturition. Vaccination
of pregnant dogs is not recommended.
Earlier concerns that concurrent CPV vaccine and CDV
would predispose vaccinated dogs to encephalitis have not
been substantiated. Currently, there is no established risk
to administering both antigens simultaneously to the same
dog. In high-risk environments such as animal shelters,
administration of a single dose of recombinant CDV vaccine
to puppies has been shown to induce a protective immune
response despite the presence of maternal antibody.

Public health implications
Despite older reports that multiple sclerosis of humans
might be linked to CDV exposure, there is no supporting documentation for either measles or distemper virus
involvement in human multiple sclerosis. CDV infection
is not considered to be zoonotic.

CANINE PARVOVIRUS INFECTION
(See also Chapter 8: Digestive diseases [pharynx to
anorectum].)

Definition/overview
CPV was first recognized in the late 1970s as a truly new
virus infection of dogs capable of causing rapid-onset,
severe viral enteritis and, in young dogs, myocarditis.
CPV is a small DNA virus that reproduces best in rapidly dividing cells such as the myocardium of puppies
and intestinal epithelium. The virus is resilient and may
remain on clothing, floors, and utensils for periods of
5 months or longer. The virus is particularly resistant
to detergents and most disinfectants. Sodium hypochlorite (one part household bleach to 30 parts water) is an

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

effective disinfectant providing prolonged contact with
contaminated surfaces can be achieved.
CPV enteritis is among the most common, highly contagious diseases of dogs. Since clinical infections first
became apparent, genetic alterations in the dog have
resulted in new viral strains. Today, in the USA and Japan,
the CPV-2b strain of CPV predominates. In Europe and the
Far East, both CPV-2a and CPV-2b are known to infect dogs.

Etiology
The transmission of CPV to susceptible dogs occurs by
way of oronasal exposure, usually with contaminated
feces. Subsequent to the initial viremia, CPV localizes in
the epithelium of the small intestine, the tongue, and
the oral and esophageal mucosae, as well as in lymphoid
tissues including the bone marrow. Virus has been isolated from lungs, spleen, liver, kidney, and myocardium.
Clinical signs of infection are related to the actual tissues
affected. In the clinical setting, enteritis and myocarditis
(in young dogs) predominate.

Pathophysiology
The virus replicates in the lymphoid tissue of the oropharynx, thymus, and mesenteric lymph nodes, from
where it disseminates to the intestinal crypts of the small
intestine. Viremia, lasting 1–5 days after infection, is
followed by localization of the virus, mainly in the epithelium lining the oral cavity, tongue, esophagus, small
intestine, and lymphoid tissue.

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs associated with CPV infection in dogs are
highly variable and may range from inapparent infection
to acute fatal disease. Most dogs, subsequent to exposure,
develop subclinical infection and recover without showing significant clinical disease. The most severely affected
dogs are younger than 12 weeks of age.
Vomiting, diarrhea (frequently associated with blood),
anorexia, and dehydration characterize acute CPV enteritis. Alternatively, CPV myocarditis can develop in puppies
younger than 8 weeks of age (Figure 21.13). Today, puppies
with myocardial disease associated with CPV infection are
rare. Affected dogs are either found dead or die following
a brief episode of discomfort and dyspnea. Examination of
the heart and lungs reveals cardiomegaly and pulmonary
edema. CPV myocarditis can occur in the absence of enteritis. Hypercoagulability and thrombosis formation are
reported in dogs with naturally occurring CPV infection.

Differential diagnosis
The clinical signs associated with enteric CPV infection
are not unique. Affected dogs should also be evaluated

K22463_C021.indd 931

931

for intussusception, intestinal obstruction (foreign body),
acute-onset manifestation of chronic kidney disease,
­poisoning or toxicity, intestinal parasitism, and hypoadrenocorticism (Addison’s disease).

Diagnosis
In the clinical setting, a diagnosis of CPV infection is
based on clinical signs, hematology, and point-of-care
test platforms capable of detecting CPV antigen in feces.
In the acute disease, profound leukopenia and lymphopenia will develop within 7–10 days following exposure.
Severe diarrhea may be associated with gram-negative
sepsis.
All young dogs presented with acute-onset diarrhea
should be evaluated using an ELISA fecal antigen test.
Although these tests are highly specific (few ­false-­positive
results), the period during which parvovirus can be
detected in feces appears limited. A negative test result
does not necessarily rule out CPV infection.
Pathologic confirmation of CPV infection is based on
histologic evaluation of the distal duodenum and jejunum. Necrosis of crypt epithelium characterizes the
lesion. The myocardium, especially the ventricles, should
be evaluated for nonsuppurative myocarditis, with infiltrates of lymphocytes and plasma cells evaluated in puppies that die of acute respiratory distress.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
IV replacement of fluid and electrolytes is the principal
goal of treatment in dogs with CPV enteritis. Antimicrobial
agents (e.g. ampicillin, 10–20 mg/kg IV q6–8h daily for
5 days) are indicated. Alternatively, enrofloxacin (5 mg/
kg PO q24h) can be given to dogs older than 6 months
of age. The use of motility modifiers in the treatment of
21.13

Figure 21.13 Viral myocarditis in conjunction with CPV in dogs
is associated with ventricular arrhythmias, congestive heart
failure, pulmonary edema, and death.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

932

Multisystemic disorders

dogs with CPV enteritis is controversial. Metoclopramide
(0.2–0.4 mg/kg SC q8h) can be given as needed to control
vomiting. Narcotic antispasmodics (e.g. diphenoxylate
HCl) can be administered but are generally not recommended. The administration of human recombinant
granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) has been
­
recommended in treating panleukopenic patients. The
dosage of G-CSF ranges from 5 to 100 mg/kg SC q24h for not
longer than 3 weeks. As a general r­ ecommendation, food
should be withheld for 1–2 days following the cessation of
vomiting. Small amounts of water are introduced, followed
by the introduction of a highly digestible, low-fat diet.
The prognosis for recovery from CPV infection following the first 7 days of enteritis is good to excellent in
the absence of secondary complications (e.g. sepsis). The
prognosis of puppies with CPV-induced myocarditis is
poor to grave.

Public health implications

Prevention

Etiology

The immunity derived subsequent to recovery from natural infection is reported to be a minimum of 20 months
and possibly for life. There is a strong correlation between
serum antibody titer and protection.
Today, all CVP vaccines are attenuated (modified live)
virus and provide excellent immunity in most dogs
(Table 21.4). Current vaccination recommendations are
the same as those for CDV. Three doses of vaccine are
recommended between 6 and 16 weeks of age. A booster
dose is administered 1 year later, then every 3 years
thereafter.
There are several potential reasons for vaccinated dogs
to remain susceptible to infection; maternally derived
antibody interference with vaccination in young dogs and
genetically predisposed non- and low-responders (to vaccination) are among the most important. Subsequent to
vaccination, transient lymphopenia (4–6 days) and shedding of vaccine virus are possible. Dogs tested with the
ELISA fecal antigen test may actually have a ­transiently
positive test result during the time of vaccine virus shedding. Although annual vaccination is recommended for
adult dogs, there is evidence to support the fact that the
DOI subsequent to the first booster vaccination persists
for 3 years or longer.
During the initial enzootic of CPV infection in the
USA (late 1970s and early 1980s), the incidence of infection in Dobermanns and Rottweilers appeared to be
significantly greater than in other breeds. The reason
behind this increased susceptibility is based on the fact
these breeds (or lines within these breeds) were genetic
non-­
responders. It is generally agreed today that
Dobermanns and Rottweilers do not have significantly
greater risk than other breeds.

Several routes of transmission have been documented.
Inoculation of infectious saliva into a susceptible animal
through a bite wound is the most common means of rabies
transmission. Airborne transmission and transplacental
rabies infection have been documented in some species;
however, these are not uniformly important in the transmission of rabies to companion animals. The incidence of
dog and cat rabies correlates with the incidence of wildlife rabies. Furthermore, the frequency of human rabies
exposures associated with rabid cats is increasing at a
greater rate than that of dogs.
The vectors for rabies vary throughout the world and
include dogs, skunks, red and Arctic foxes, raccoons,
bats, cats, wolves, mongooses, jackals, and cows. In North
America, rabies infection has been sustained within a
variety of wildlife reservoirs. Skunks, coyotes, raccoons,
and foxes comprise the majority of wildlife carnivores
known to harbor the rabies virus. Although a small percentage of bats throughout the USA are known to carry
rabies virus, bat rabies has been primarily implicated in
human infections for the past several decades. Bats have
only rarely been implicated in transmitting infection or
infectious virus to cats and dogs.
Rodents, rabbits, and hares are uncommonly affected
with rabies, and no human cases of rabies have ever been
associated with these species. Bite wounds to humans by
any of these species are not routinely regarded as rabies
exposure.

K22463_C021.indd 932

CPV is not zoonotic and poses no threat to human health.

CANINE RABIES
(See also Chapter 14: Disorders of the nervous system and
muscle.)

Definition/overview
With descriptions of ‘mad dogs’ dating back to the 23rd
century BC, rabies is regarded as one of the oldest infectious diseases known to infect humans and animals. The
disease is caused by a fragile, enveloped RNA virus of the
family Rhabdoviridae. While clinical rabies virus infection is considered to be uniformly fatal, conventional
disinfectants, ultraviolet light, and heat easily destroy
rabies virus.

Pathophysiology
Clinical rabies has been conventionally classified into
two major types: furious (‘mad’ or hyperexcitable, or psychotic) and paralytic (‘dumb’ rabies). However, the clinical

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

signs of rabies are highly variable and do not necessarily
fit into one classification. The usual incubation period following exposure in dogs is 3–8 weeks; incubation periods
as long as 6 months have been reported.

Clinical presentation
Initially, dogs will manifest signs of nervousness, anxiety, and seeking solitude. If a bite wound is present,
most a
­ nimals will demonstrate irritation and pruritus
at the site of viral entry. Dogs typically manifest clinical
illness for 1–10 days following the onset of signs. Dogs
with furious rabies become progressively restless and
demonstrate hyperexcitability in response to auditory
and visual stimuli. They may bite at imaginary objects
or develop pica. In the terminal phase, progressive disorientation and grand mal seizures develop.
Progressive lower motor neuron paralysis or cranial
nerve deficits are the first recognizable signs in dogs
with paralytic (‘dumb’) rabies (Figure 21.14). The dog
may be observed to have a change in the tone of the bark
associated with laryngeal paralysis. Excess salivation
and dysphagia are seen in conjunction with a so-called
‘drop jaw’. The appearance of choking prompts owners/­
veterinarians to attempt to remove a foreign body from
the oral cavity, resulting in significant exposure to infectious saliva. Once paralysis develops, death follows from
respiratory failure within 2–4 days.

Differential diagnosis
Rabies is a principal differential diagnosis in any dog
with an acute-onset neurologic disorder associated with
behavior change, particularly among dogs that do not
have a vaccination history. Other diseases that present
with signs similar to rabies include CDV infection and
21.14

933

other causes of encephalitis, sepsis, tetanus, botulism,
and intracranial neoplasia.

Diagnosis
A diagnosis of rabies may be presumed on the basis of
clinical signs. The fact that other infectious diseases (e.g.
CDV infection or idiopathic epilepsy) may manifest indistinguishable clinical signs justifies including rabies as a
differential diagnosis in any animal with unexplainable
neurologic or behavioral signs. There is no antemortem
diagnostic test considered sufficiently accurate to confirm rabies infection.
Direct IFA testing of nervous tissue is the most common method utilized today to confirm rabies infection.
Because this method requires thin touch impressions
of the brain and cerebellum, severely traumatized or
decomposed tissues may invalidate this test. Prompt,
proper handling of specimens is critical for ensuring an
accurate diagnosis.
A number of other diagnostic methods have been
described. PCR testing of nervous system tissue, histologic identification of Negri bodies (intracytoplasmic
inclusions), and mouse inoculation are still available, but
are less sensitive than direct IFA testing of nervous tissue.
The head (or body) of an animal suspected of having
rabies should be chilled on wet ice or refrigerated as soon
after death or euthanasia as possible. The tissue must not
be frozen. If it is necessary to ship the head (or body), it is
recommended that approved shipping containers available
from public health or animal control officials are utilized. If
it does become necessary to remove the head of a suspect
animal, extreme care should be taken to avoid direct contact with any body fluids or tissues (especially brain tissue).

Management
Treatment/prognosis
No attempt should be made to provide primary care for
a dog or cat suspected of having rabies. In dogs, cats, and
humans, rabies is regarded as a uniformly fatal disease.

Prevention

Figure 21.14 Progressive lower motor neuron paralysis with
cranial nerve deficits similar to those shown here can be early
signs of ‘dumb’ rabies in the dog. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C021.indd 933

Only killed (inactivated) virus vaccines are currently
available for use in dogs. Administering rabies vaccine in
accordance with state and local statutes is recommended
for all dogs. The first dose of vaccine may be given as early
as 12 weeks of age. Regardless of age at the time of initial inoculation, all dogs should be boosted with a single
dose of rabies vaccine at 1 year following the initial dose.
Booster vaccinations should be given every year or every
3 years thereafter depending on local statutes and manufacturer recommendations. General recommendations

23/04/16 1:28 pm

934

Multisystemic disorders

for vaccinating dogs against rabies are outlined in
Table 21.4. Where required, veterinarians are expected to
follow state, provincial, or local law. Serologic testing can
be done to establish an individual dog’s response to vaccination. Such testing may be required prior to shipment
of dogs to rabies-free countries or regions of the world.
Important: A rabies antibody titer is not a legal index of
immunity in lieu of vaccination.

Public health implications
Virtually all strains of rabies virus can infect humans.
Humans exposed to infectious saliva of any rabid animal are considered to be at risk of developing rabies.
However, determining whether or not ‘exposure’ has actually occurred can be difficult and is typically determined
by criteria established by state or local health departments. In many locations, human and animal exposure
is defined in law.
The ability to specifically identify and capture the animal involved, knowledge of any contact with saliva, knowledge of whether the attack was provoked or unprovoked,
and knowledge of rabies prevalence in the geographic
area are criteria that are commonly taken into consideration prior to recommending post-exposure immunoprophylaxis of humans. In any event, a bite wound from any
domestic or wild animal should be treated aggressively
by washing thoroughly as soon after the exposure as possible. Irrigation of the wound with large quantities of a
20% aqueous soap solution or quaternary ammonium
solution (e.g. benzalkonium chloride) is recommended.
Ethanol in concentrations of 43% or higher can be applied
to open wounds. Post-exposure immunoprophylaxis in
humans consists of the administration of human rabies
immunoglobulin and human diploid cell vaccine.

FUNGAL, RICKETTSIAL, AND PROTOZOAL
INFECTIONS

(e.g. granulocytotropic ehrlichiosis [Ehrlichia ewingi] and
infectious canine cyclic thrombocytopenia) have been
recognized and are associated with different species of
Ehrlichia.
Anaplasmosis, another tick-borne systemic disease, is
known to cause a spectrum of clinical signs similar to that
of ehrlichiosis. Anaplasma phagocytophilum (formerly
Ehrlichia equi), the cause of canine granulocytotropic anaplasmosis, is likely to produce the most common form of
clinical anaplasmosis in dogs.

Etiology
The brown dog tick Rhipicephalus sanguineus is the
arthropod vector of E. canis (Figure 21.15). Although vector ticks do not serve as reservoirs of infection, they are
able to harbor infectious organisms for over 1 year and
can transmit the infection to susceptible dogs for at least
155 days following infection.
A. phagocytophilum is a gram-negative obligate intracellular parasite. Subsequent to the reclassification of
ehrlichiae, the term ‘granulocytic ehrlichiosis’ has been
replaced with granulocytotropic anaplasmosis. Occurrence
of infection follows the distribution of Ixodes spp. tick vectors, and is similar to that of canine Lyme borreliosis.

Pathophysiology
Canine monocytotropic ehrlichiosis is characterized by a
reduction in cellular blood elements. E. canis is characterized by three distinct phases of infection: acute (weeks),
subclinical (months to years), and chronic (months).
During the acute phase the organism multiplies within
circulating mononuclear cells and the mononuclear
phagocytic tissues of the liver, spleen, and lymph nodes.
Infected cells are transported in the blood to other tissues, particularly meninges, lung, and kidney, where
21.15

EHRLICHIOSIS AND ANAPLASMOSIS
(See also Chapter 16: Hematologic disorders, and
Chapter 19: Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases.)

Definition/overview
Ehrlichiosis is a tick-borne systemic disease that occurs
worldwide and is known to be caused by a variety of
rickettsial species in the genus Ehrlichia (reclassified in
2001). Several species of Ehrlichia are known to infect
the dog, although Ehrlichia canis, the cause of canine
monocytotropic ehrlichiosis, is the most common cause
of the disease in dogs. Variations of the clinical disease

K22463_C021.indd 934

Figure 21.15 The nymphal and adult life stages of the brown
dog tick Rhipicephalus sanguineus. (Courtesy D.J. Meyer)

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

935

they attach to the vascular endothelium, causing vasculitis and infection of the subendothelial tissue. During this
phase thrombocytopenia develops subsequent to platelet
consumption, sequestration, and destruction. Anemia
develops progressively owing to suppression of erythropoiesis and accelerated destruction of erythrocytes.
During the subclinical phase there is variable persistence
of the thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and anemia.
Chronic disease occurs in those dogs unable to mount an
effective immune response to the organism.
The actual mechanism whereby A. phagocytophilum
causes clinical disease is unknown. The bacteria enter
neutrophils by endocytosis, where they become incorporated into phagosomes. Morulae are formed within
the phagosome subsequent to replication. Infection
occurs only after an extended feeding time by the Ixodes
tick lasting at least 24–48 hours. Clinical signs develop
1–2 weeks following infection. Acute and chronic phases
of infection are described.

nonlocalizing pain is described in most dogs. Dogs
may appear weak, stiff, or lame. Discrete joint pain is
uncommon. Thrombocytopenia and granulocytopenia
­
are spontaneous and are not part of the clinical presentation. Immunity from natural infection appears shortlived and reinfection is possible.

Clinical presentation

Diagnosis

Classically, canine monocytotropic ehrlichiosis is categorized into three phases. The acute phase begins following
a 1–3-week incubation period and lasts for 2–4 weeks.
Clinical signs of illness are varied and include fever, nasal
discharge, decreased appetite, weight loss, and lymphadenomegaly. Clinical signs typically resolve spontaneously. During the subclinical phase, at 40–120 days post
infection, clinical signs are absent, although the infection
is still established. The subclinical phase can persist for
several years. In some dogs a chronic phase of infection
will develop and is characterized by either vague signs
of illness or more severe hematologic impairment associated with bone marrow suppression. Profound pancytopenia may develop. Spontaneous bleeding, characterized
as dermal petechiae or ecchymoses, is common. Epistaxis
is most frequently reported by owners. In other cases,
profound neurologic signs such as seizures, ataxia, vestibular dysfunction, and anisocoria, as well as hyperesthesia, have been observed.
The spectrum of clinical signs associated with ehrlichiosis is further complicated by the fact that they can
vary dramatically depending on the species involved.
Clinical findings range from polyarthritis associated with
immune complex arthritis or hemarthrosis, to atrophy
of skeletal muscles, enlarged peripheral lymph nodes,
edema, and lethargy.
Clinical signs associated with granulocytotropic anaplasmosis are vague and indistinct. It is currently not
known whether all infections lead to the development
of clinical signs. Most dogs are reported to develop fever
and lethargy, with associated anorexia. Generalized,

In the clinical setting, a diagnosis of ehrlichiosis is usually
made on the basis of clinical signs, hematologic abnormalities, and serology. It has been suggested that infections are more common among German Shepherd Dogs.
Nonregenerative anemia and thrombocytopenia are
the predominant hematologic findings. Approximately
one-third of affected dogs will manifest leukopenia.
Pancytopenia is a less common finding and is more likely
to occur in the chronic phase of disease. Pancytopenia is
reported to occur more often in German Shepherd Dogs.
Although thrombocytopenia is consistently reported in
all stages of ehrlichiosis, the absence of thrombocytopenia
cannot be used to rule out the infection. Serologic confirmation of ehrlichiosis is based on the results of an indirect IFA test. Antibody may be detected in serum as early
as 7 days following the initial infection. However, some
dogs may not seroconvert until 28 days post infection.
Depending on the laboratory and methodology used, a
single titer may be used to establish infection/exposure. It
should be noted that infection cannot be confirmed by the
presence of a single ‘positive’ antibody titer alone. Clinical
signs and laboratory findings must be considered in the
light of serology results. Following treatment, antibody
titers may decline in 6–9 months. In other dogs, titers are
sustained for several years despite the absence of clinical signs. A canine rapid assay (ELISA) test is available as
a point-of-care test for E. canis antibody (Snap 3Dx® and
Snap 4Dx®). While the test has high sensitivity and specificity for detecting antibody, a positive test result confirms
exposure, not infection. Test results must be considered in
the light of the patient’s clinical presentation.

K22463_C021.indd 935

Differential diagnosis
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia is an important differential diagnosis to consider when evaluating a patient
suspected of having ehrlichiosis, but not granulocytotropic anaplasmosis. Affected dogs may also have concurrent
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. The presence of other
clinical signs (neurologic signs, peripheral limb edema) and
laboratory findings (leukopenia) significantly expands the
list of differential diagnoses. Dogs with granulocytotropic
anaplasmosis may appear to have Lyme borreliosis, toxoplasmosis (myositis), systemic lupus erythematosus, bacteremia/sepsis, or any of a multitude of system disorders.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

936

Multisystemic disorders

Among dogs that have died of ehrlichiosis,
­histopathologic findings include perivascular plasma cell
infiltrates in several organs (e.g. lung, brain, kidney, lymph
node, bone marrow, and spleen). Morulae (intracytoplasmic inclusions) are rare but have been observed in mononuclear phagocytic cells and bone marrow (Figure 21.16).
Diagnosis of canine granulocytotropic anaplasmosis
has generally been limited to those cases in which morulae can be visualized. Recently, a canine rapid assay
(ELISA) test has become available in the USA for the detection of antibody to Anaplasma (Snap 4Dx®). A ­positive test
result for Anaplasma antibody does not confirm the infection. Clinicians must consider the clinical signs along
with test results before initiating treatment.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Although several inexpensive drugs are available, the success of treatment of ehrlichiosis is generally dependent
on the severity of disease and the ability to treat early in
the course of infection. Dogs with chronic ehrlichiosis are
particularly difficult to treat and have a commensurately
poor prognosis. Doxycycline (5–10 mg/kg PO q12h for
10–21 days) is the preferred treatment for acute infection.
Significant clinical improvement may be noted within
1–2 days. However, the treatment duration is justifiably
extended to 6 weeks depending on clinical response. The
cost of treatment combined with the dramatic resolution of clinical signs justifies the empiric administration
of antibiotic to treat ehrlichiosis in the absence of a confirmed diagnosis. In fact, a presumptive diagnosis of ehrlichiosis can be based on response to therapy.
Alternatively, minocycline (10 mg/kg PO q12h) can be
given for 10 days with similar results expected. Tetracycline
21.16

and oxytetracycline are still c­ onsidered ­effective, but they
should be given three times daily and may be associated
with mild side-effects. Since the ­tetracyclines, including
­doxycycline, will produce y
­ ellow d
­ iscoloration of e­ rupting
teeth, it is feasible to r­ ecommend ­chloramphenicol (15–25
mg/kg PO, IV, or SC q8h) for at least 2 weeks in dogs less
than 6 months of age.
Failure to respond to conventional oral antimicrobial
therapy may denote the presence of a resistant infection.
Imidocarb dipropionate (5 mg/kg IM once, repeated in
2–3 weeks) is recommended.
The role of short-term corticosteroid therapy in the
early treatment of ehrlichiosis is controversial. In the
clinical setting it may be difficult quickly to distinguish between immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
and ehrlichiosis. As a result, initial empiric therapy of
thrombocytopenic dogs is justified and includes both
immunosuppressive levels of prednisolone (1–2 mg/kg
PO q12h for 7–10 days) plus administration of an appropriate antimicrobial (e.g. doxycycline).
The recommended treatment for canine granulocytotropic anaplasmosis is doxycycline (5–10 mg/kg PO q12h
for 10 days).

Prevention
There is currently no vaccine available for the prevention of ehrlichiosis or anaplasmosis. Short-term preventive measures include oral administration of tetracycline
(6.6 mg/kg/day) or doxycycline (10 mg/kg/day) for dogs
living in endemic areas. In addition, efforts to manage
tick infections using oral or topical acaricidal products are
recommended.

Public health implications
Canine ehrlichiosis is not a zoonotic disease. However, it
should be noted that humans are also susceptible to ehrlichiosis subsequent to contact with vector ticks. It is not
known whether dogs play a significant role in carrying
the ticks capable of infecting humans. Although dogs,
cats, and humans can be naturally infected with E. equi,
the role of domestic pets in the transmission of disease to
humans has not been established.

CANINE NASAL ASPERGILLOSIS
(See also Chapter 4: Respiratory disorders.)

Definition/overview
Figure 21.16 This blood smear, taken from a dog with
ehrlichiosis, shows an Ehrlichia sp. morula (arrow) within the
cytoplasm of a neutrophil. (Courtesy D.J. Meyer)

K22463_C021.indd 936

Aspergillus fumigatus is a ubiquitous, saprophytic fungus
capable of colonizing tissue within the nasal cavity and
frontal sinuses. Rarely, disseminated aspergillosis can

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

develop in dogs, with German Shepherd Dogs (between
the ages of 2 and 8 years) being the most common breed
affected.
Nasal aspergillosis is hypothesized to occur in immunocompromised dogs. However, other factors, particularly nasal foreign bodies and trauma, are likely to play
an important role. Nasal aspergillosis is most likely to
occur in dogs without concomitant disease. A. fumigatus
infection is associated with the production of a dermo­
necrotic endotoxin that is presumed to cause turbinate
necrosis and erosion of the planum nasale (Figure 21.17).
Penicillium infection is frequently described in conjunction with Aspergillus infection; however, nasal penicilliosis has not been characterized.

Etiology
Aspergillosis is caused by several species of fungus of the
genus Aspergillus. A. fumigatus, the most commonly implicated species in aspergillosis, grows abundantly in rotting
vegetation and wood chips, compost, sewage, and moldy
hay. Some species live mainly in soil. The fungus produces many small spores, which can become airborne and
inhaled.
21.17

937

Pathophysiology
Colonization is usually prevented by a local immune
response to inhaled spores involving IgA and tissue macrophages. Due to their size (2–3 µm), airborne conidia
penetrate no further than the nasal epithelium. Adhesion
systems have been recognized that allow the conidia to
adhere to and penetrate epithelial cells. A toxic metabolite, gliotoxin, inhibits phagocytosis, thereby facilitating
recognition by innate immune mechanisms.

Clinical presentation
Nasal mycosis is most likely to occur in dogs that are
3 years of age or younger, although dogs of any age may
be affected. Profuse mucopurulent nasal discharge that
is not responsive to antimicrobials, intermittent epistaxis, ulceration of the external nares (planum nasale),
and facial pain are the most common clinical signs seen
in dogs with an established infection. Radiographic or
CT evaluation of the nasal cavity (occlusal view) typically reveals an intact vomer, with evidence of turbinate
destruction and fluid density in one or both nasal cavities (Figure 21.18).

Differential diagnosis
Nasal aspergillosis is a complex diagnosis to confirm in
clinical practice. Several intranasal disorders such as foreign body, oronasal fistula, cryptococcosis (rare in dogs),
and neoplasia should be ruled out. Bacterial rhinitis is a
common secondary manifestation of intranasal disease,
regardless of the cause, and should not be considered a
primary diagnosis.

Diagnosis

Figure 21.17 Erosion of the planum nasale in a 4-year-old
mixed-breed dog with nasal aspergillosis of at least 6 months’
duration.

K22463_C021.indd 937

Diagnostic confirmation of nasal mycosis is based on
identification of the fungus in conjunction with clinical
signs. The fact that either Aspergillus spp. or Penicillium
spp. may occur as contaminants in the nasal cavity of the
dog precludes making a diagnosis strictly on the basis
of cytologic examination or a positive fungal culture.
Radiographic or CT features, combined with visualization
of lesions in the nasal cavity (rhinoscopy) and serology,
are the principal criteria used to make a diagnosis of
nasal mycosis.
The quality of a rhinoscopic examination is dependent
on the quality of equipment available and the experience
of the endoscopist. A 3–5 mm diameter flexible pediatric bronchoscope with a suitable biopsy channel is the
preferred instrument for examining the nasal cavity
(Figures 21.19–21.21). Biopsies of appropriate lesions
should be evaluated cytologically, by fungal culture,
as well as with histopathology and appropriate special

23/04/16 1:28 pm

938

Multisystemic disorders

21.18

21.20

Figure 21.20 Rhinoscopic view of nasal aspergillosis showing
a characteristic fungal granuloma. (Courtesy M. Schaer and K.
Cooke)
21.21

Figure 21.18 Occlusal radiographic projection of the nasal
cavity of a dog with a 7-month history of nasal discharge not
responsive to antibiotics. Note the loss of turbinate detail
(arrow).

21.19

Figure 21.21 Rhinoscopic view of nasal aspergillosis showing
fungal rhinitis (white plaque). (Courtesy M. Schaer and K. Cooke)

staining. A limited number of laboratories offer serologic
testing as a means of diagnosing both Aspergillus and
Penicillium infection. In the author’s experience, serologic
evidence of nasal mycosis is less reliable than direct visualization, culture, and cytology.

Management
Treatment/prognosis

Figure 21.19 Lateral radiographic projection of the nasal cavity
of a dog during rhinoscopy with a 5 mm bronchoscope.

K22463_C021.indd 938

Systemic therapy (itraconazole, 5 mg/kg PO q12h for
10 weeks [minimum] or fluconazole, 2.5–5.0 mg/kg PO
q12h for 10 weeks [minimum]) for nasal aspergillosis
has generally been associated with poor success rates
and high costs. Enilconazole emulsion has been recommended for introduction into the nasal cavities and

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

21.22

21.23

Figures 21.22, 21.23 Aspergillus fungal granulomas surgically
removed from the nasal cavity of a dog. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

frontal sinuses by way of surgically implanted tubes.
Although the treatment success rate approaches 90% in
affected dogs, the need to irrigate the nasal cavity twice
daily for 7 days, combined with the discomfort experienced by the patient, makes this a difficult procedure to
perform routinely.
Topical treatment with the antifungal agent clotrimazole is recommended. Treatment can be performed in
clinical practice, it is not expensive, and it has a high rate
of success following a single treatment. The clotrimazole

K22463_C021.indd 939

939

treatment protocol entails filling the left and right nasal
cavities with commercially available 1% clotrimazole liquid (flush); gel and cream preparations are also available
and may be indicated in the management of advanced
frontal sinus infections.
The patient is prepared so that the clotrimazole liquid
can be administered over a 1-hour period directly into the
nasal cavity. The posterior nares (choanae) are occluded,
thereby preventing seepage of the compound into the
­nasopharynx. The clinician is encouraged to become completely familiar with this technique prior to attempting
treatment.
Rhinotomy and turbinectomy have also been
­advocated in surgical texts for the treatment of nasal
aspergillosis. Today, most authors agree that medical
management of aspergillosis with clotrimazole infusion into the nasal cavity is the preferred method of
­treatment. Surgical treatment is indicated only if all other
methods have failed (Figures 21.22, 21.23); it is generally
reserved for removal of large granulomas and mycetoma.
The prognosis for recovery from nasal aspergillosis
approaches 90% in patients treated with clotrimazole
infusion. Approximately 15–20% of patients will require a
second treatment. Left untreated, the infection will progress and can, in advanced cases, penetrate the cribriform
plate and infect the meninges and/or brain. Resolution
of clinical signs following treatment, rather than a
decrease in antibody titer, is the best means of evaluating the response to treatment. Antibody titers are known
to persist for as long as 5 years following the successful
treatment of nasal aspergillosis. The prognosis following
resolution of clinical signs appears to be quite good, as
recurrence is uncommon.
Treatment is most likely to fail when fungal granulomas are located within the frontal sinus. An optional
treatment for these cases includes performing sinusotomy and curettage followed by infusing clotrimazole
directly into the frontal sinuses.

Prevention
There is no vaccine currently available for use in companion animals to prevent aspergillosis or penicilliosis.
Since the organism is a ubiquitous fungus, it is clinically
impractical to advise owners to avoid pet contact with the
organism.

Public health implications
Although humans as well as dogs can acquire aspergillosis, the infections in dogs are not considered to be
zoonotic.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

940

Multisystemic disorders

Editors’ note: There is a systemic form of aspergillosis
in dogs caused by Aspergillus terreus that causes polysystemic disease including the formation of fungal
granulomas in the kidney, diskospondylitis, uveitis, and
other tissue involvements. It is most common in German
Shepherd Dogs and is thought to be due to an immunoincompetency. Treatment entails long-term systemic antifungal drugs, but the prognosis is usually poor.

BABESIOSIS
(See also Chapter 16: Hematologic disorders.)

Definition/overview
Canine babesiosis refers to disease caused by infection
with Babesia canis (larger piroplasms) and/or Babesia
gibsoni (smaller piroplasms). Infection follows inoculation with sporozoites transmitted in the saliva of infected
ticks. Infections are recognized throughout much of the
world, particularly southern Europe, Africa, Asia, North
America, Central America, and South America. Infections
are most likely to occur in dogs <1 year of age.

consequence of acute-onset Babesia infection associated
with hypotensive shock and hypoxia. In addition to hemolytic anemia and splenomegaly, thrombocytopenia and
lymphadenomegaly have been observed. The variation
in clinical signs that may be manifested depends on the
tissues affected. Mild to severe pulmonary disease, vomiting, diarrhea, ulcerative stomatitis, significant hemorrhage, myositis and rhabdomyolysis, and CNS signs are
also reported. Subclinical infections are also reported.
American Staffordshire Terriers and American Pit Bull
Terriers are two breeds having a relatively high prevalence of infection and this has been reported in many
countries. Recent studies suggest transmission may occur
subsequent to bite wounds from infected dogs.

Differential diagnosis
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia are important differential diagnoses for
acute-onset signs associated with babesiosis in dogs.
­
However, affected dogs should also be evaluated for other
tick-borne diseases (e.g. ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain
spotted fever [RMSF]).

Etiology

Diagnosis

The disease is transmitted by a variety of tick vectors,
including Rhipicephalus sanguineus. Recently, Dermacentor
variablilis, the American dog tick, has been recognized as
a competent vector. Once infected, the Babesia organisms
multiply within erythrocytes. Transplacental transmission is suspected to occur and has been associated with
the ‘fading puppy’ syndrome. Infection may also result
from transfusion of contaminated blood. Interestingly,
infection with B. gibsoni may result from fighting between
dogs. A higher than expected incidence is reported in the
American Staffordshire Terrier and American Pit Bull
Terrier.

Diagnostic confirmation is frequently based on visual
identification of the organisms within infected erythrocytes using routine staining methods (Figure 21.24).
Merozoites can be detected within erythrocytes (peripheral blood smear) by 1–3 weeks following infection.
Serology may prove useful in identifying B. canis antibody,
which cross-reacts with B. gibsoni antibody. Detection
of antibody titers to Babesia spp., using the indirect IFA
test, can be performed. Since intraerythrocytic organisms
can be difficult to enumerate, the use of antibody titers
to document infection is relevant in the clinical setting.
Depending on the laboratory used and the methodology,
21.24

Pathophysiology
Erythrocytes parasitized by Babesia are destroyed by replication of the organism within the cells or by immune-­
mediated reactions against the parasite or self-antigens.
The resulting destruction of erythrocytes leads to anemia. The incubation period is usually from 10 days to
3 weeks. Subclinical carrier dogs used as blood donors are
excellent sources of infection for blood recipients.

Clinical presentation
Acute-onset (severe) hemolytic anemia, associated
with fever, decreased appetite, splenomegaly, and lethargy, are the most common clinical findings reported.
Although chronic infections can occur, they are uncommon and poorly characterized. Sudden death is a possible

K22463_C021.indd 940

Figure 21.24 Canine Babesia organisms shown as
intraerythrocytic protozoal organisms.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

a single serum titer of 1:80 or higher is generally regarded
as sufficient to diagnose B. canis infection. A titer of 1:320
or higher is required to diagnose B. gibsoni infection.
While some university and commercial laboratories are
offering PCR assays for the detection of ­babesiosis in
dogs, test results may vary among laboratories, as test
standards have not been defined. Also, low specificity
(false-positive test results) remain problematic. To avoid
false-negative test results, dogs should be tested as early
in the course of infection as possible and prior to the initiation of treatment.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Although a wide variety of drugs has been advocated for
treating babesiosis throughout the world, the two most
effective drugs, diminazene aceturate and phenamidine
isethionate, are not approved for use in the USA. Relapses
may occur as the organism can persist even after treatment. A single dose of imidocarb dipropionate (7.5 mg/kg
IM) has been effective against B. canis only. Alternatively,
administration of two doses of imidocarb dipropionate
(6 mg/kg IM), 2 weeks apart, has also been recommended.
Quinuronium sulfate (0.25 mg/kg SC given twice
over a 2-day interval) has resulted in resolution of clinical signs. Concurrent administration of corticosteroids (1–2 mg/kg q12h) may be necessary for periods of
2–3 weeks. However, sustained corticosteroid treatment
may result in exacerbation of the disease. Given the acute
systemic impact of B. canis infection, the prognosis of
dogs with confirmed infection is poor. Treatment is not
expected to clear the infection completely.
Clinical reports support a breed predilection among
Greyhounds for B. canis (vogeli) infection. Although clinical illness is uncommon, the significance of the infection
is as yet undetermined.
Natural infection with B. gibsoni has been effectively
treated in dogs using a combination of atovaquone
(13.3 mg/kg PO q8h) with azithromycin (10 mg/kg PO
q24h) for 10 days.
Clindamycin is the recommended treatment for B.
microti infection in humans. In dogs, anecdotal reports
suggest resolution of clinical signs associated with
babesiosis using doses ranging from 25 to 50 mg/
kg/day. Supplemental babesiacidal therapy is still
recommended.

Prevention
Efforts to prevent infection are based on the ability
adequately to control tick infestations. Routine topical administration of an acaricide (e.g. fipronil) or

K22463_C021.indd 941

941

oral administration (e.g. afoxolaner) combined with
environmental control constitutes the most effective
­
means of preventing infection. An attenuated B. canis vaccine is available in Europe. Reports on efficacy vary. The
vaccine does not prevent infection, but appears to mitigate severity of clinical signs once infection occurs. There
is currently no licensed vaccine available in the USA.

Public health implications
Although canine babesiosis is not regarded as a risk to
humans, infected dogs do represent a reservoir of infectious organisms that, in the presence of the vector ticks,
could result in human exposure. However, B. microti is
the most common organism affecting humans in the
USA. Infections are generally considered to be mild and
self-limiting or can be treated with clindamycin.

ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER
Definition/overview
Rickettsiae belonging to the spotted fever group (SFG)
are responsible for the tick-borne infection of dogs and
people known as Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF).
Despite its name, RMSF occurs throughout the USA, in
parts of western Canada, and in Mexico and Central and
South America. Today, the majority of cases reported in
humans and dogs are from the eastern USA. Although
four SFG species of Rickettsia have been isolated from
ticks, R. rickettsii is the SFG species known to infect
humans and animals in the western hemisphere.

Etiology
This obligate intracellular parasite is transmitted
through the bite of either of two ticks: Dermacentor andersoni or D. variabilis.

Pathophysiology
Subsequent to inoculation through the bite of an infected
tick, the rickettsiae replicate in vascular endothelium,
producing a significant vasculitis within small arteries
and venules. Subsequent loss of plasma may culminate in
the formation of edema in the brain, lungs, and skin. In
addition, microvascular hemorrhage, thrombocytopenia,
and DIC may result. In a small number of animals, infection culminates in shock and death.

Clinical presentation
Clinical disease associated with SFG rickettsial infection
is most likely to occur in young dogs (<2 years of age)
presented between the months of March and October (in
the northern hemisphere). A breed predilection has been

23/04/16 1:28 pm

942

Multisystemic disorders

recognized, with the German Shepherd Dog having a
­particularly high incidence of infection.
Fever associated with myalgia/arthralgia, decreased
appetite, and a history of known tick exposure are among
the most common findings in dogs with RMSF. Other signs
resulting from widespread vasculitis include edema and
hyperemia of the lips and ears. In males, scrotal edema
and epididymal swelling may be present. In addition,
petechial and ecchymotic hemorrhages may be seen on
mucous membranes and during funduscopic examination.
Overt, spontaneous bleeding may be noted in severely
affected animals. In advanced cases, evidence of cardiovascular, neurologic, and renal damage may be present
and this represents some of the most common causes of
death or permanent organ dysfunction. Severe cases can
terminate from shock, DIC, or meningoencephalitis.

Differential diagnosis
Dogs with RMSF may present with a wide spectrum of
clinical signs consistent with those associated with other
tick-borne diseases (e.g. ehrlichiosis and babesiosis). If
presented for spontaneous bleeding and/or epistaxis,
patients should be evaluated for immune-mediated
thrombocytopenia, von Willebrand disease, or rodenticide toxicity. Canine distemper, polyarthritis, and brucellosis (among male dogs with orchitis/epididymitis)
should also be considered.

Diagnosis
Hematologic findings are relatively unremarkable in
dogs with RMSF. However, thrombocytopenia is among
the most consistent laboratory abnormalities reported in
infected dogs. (RMSF is not usually associated with platelet counts <75,000/ml. In the clinical setting this information may be helpful in distinguishing RMSF from dogs
with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, which usually
have platelet counts <50,000/ml.) Hypercholesterolemia is
reported to be a consistent finding among infected dogs,
but it does not represent a reliable diagnostic criterion.
Although a number of slight biochemical abnormalities
are reported, the incidence is highly variable, depending
on the severity and location of infection. Severely infected
animals may have cardiac involvement, during which ECG
abnormalities may be detected: ST-segment and T-wave
depressions, as well as premature ventricular contractions.
Although considerable effort has been made to develop
serologic tests that will reliably diagnose RMSF, acute and
convalescent titers are still recommended as the most reliable means of confirming a diagnosis. However, IgG titers
for RMSF antibody are not expected to rise significantly
until 2–3 weeks post infection. For this reason, the clinician

K22463_C021.indd 942

is advised to prescribe empiric antimicrobial therapy on the
basis of clinical signs and history rather than wait for laboratory results on paired serum samples. Using a single IgM
RMSF antibody titer may have some advantage in obtaining early diagnostic confirmation on the basis of a single
titer. However, the availability of this assay does limit its
practical application in clinical practice. If available, laboratories that provide direct IFA staining of infected tissues
offer the advantage of an early, single sample diagnosis.
Although death from RMSF is uncommon, the most
common findings include petechial and ecchymotic hemorrhages throughout most tissues in addition to hemorrhagic lymphadenomegaly. Rickettsiae are not detected
by routine histologic staining methods.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
The decision to treat RMSF should be based on history,
physical findings, and evidence of m
­ oderate thrombocytopenia. Several drugs are available. Doxycycline
(10–20 mg/kg PO q12h for 7–10 days) is the primary
­recommendation for treating RMSF in dogs and humans.
Alternatively, ­
tetracycline (22–30 mg/kg PO q8h for
7–10 days) can be used. Other antibiotics have not proven
to be efficacious and may actually lead to increased morbidity (and death). Tetracycline is more likely than doxycycline to label (or stain) dental enamel when administered
for 10 days or longer to puppies less than 6 months of age.
Response to therapy can be dramatic, with improvement noted within 24–72 hours following the onset of
antibiotic therapy. In severely affected cases, supportive
care of dogs is centered around the management of shock,
spontaneous bleeding, or evidence of cardiac or renal disease. However, administration of IV fluid therapy may
actually contribute to rapid onset pulmonary or cerebral
edema due to increased vascular permeability associated
with the infection.

Prevention
Currently there is no vaccine available for the prevention
of RMSF in dogs. However, natural immunity subsequent
to infection with R. rickettsii has been reported to persist
for as long as 3 years post infection. Management of tick
­infestation in dogs is still the best method of preventing
RMSF. The routine use of the excellent topical acaricidal
drugs available today is the best means of preventing RMSF.

Public health implications
Although RMSF is frequently cited as a zoonotic ­disease,
infection is not transmitted directly from infected dogs
to humans. Although dogs may serve as a ­reservoir of

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

­infectious ticks, dogs with RMSF do not pose a direct
threat to humans. It should be noted that human ­infection
can potentially occur subsequent to removal of infectious
ticks from dogs. Direct contact with infectious ­hemolymph
is a potential source of infection for people.

943

Since the respiratory tract is the portal of entry, clinical
signs of pneumonia, including cough and dyspnea, are
reported (Figures 21.25–21.30). Systemic signs include
diarrhea, lameness, abdominal effusion, skin lesions,
21.25

SYSTEMIC MYCOSES
Definition/overview
The systemic (or deep) mycoses are those infections in dogs
and cats caused by Blastomyces dermatitidis ­(blastomycosis),
Coccidioides immitis (coccidioidomycosis), Cryptococcus neoformans (cryptococcosis), and Histoplasma c­ apsulatum (histoplasmosis). Each of the organisms listed can be isolated
from soil within specific geographic regions throughout
the world. Despite the mapping of endemic areas within
the USA, the frequency with which pets travel throughout
the country suggests that both dogs and, less commonly,
cats can be presented with clinical disease o
­utside of
defined endemic areas. Since humans and animals share
the environment in which soil contamination exists, it is
not unusual to see the prevalence of animal infections correspond to the prevalence of human infections.

21.26

Etiology
The respiratory tract is the primary route of exposure
among susceptible dogs and cats. Given the ubiquitous nature of the organisms in soil, it is obvious that
many more animals will be exposed than will become
clinically ill.

Pathophysiology
In susceptible animals, primary infection generally begins
in the lung once the organism reaches the terminal airways.
From there, dissemination to multiple organs is possible. In
the clinical setting it is the particular organ or organ systems infected that are responsible for the clinical signs. It
is still unclear why some animals, subsequent to exposure,
develop severe disseminated disease, while others remain
healthy. It has been suggested that disseminated disease
is a consequence of exposure in ­immunocompromised animals. Although antibody does develop in response to infection, it is not protective. Recovery from mycotic disease is
attributed to cell-mediated immunity.

Clinical presentation
In the few reported cases of systemic mycosis in cats there
appears to be no age, breed, or sex predilection to infection. In dogs, however, infection is most likely to occur
between 1 and 5 years of age. In most cases, clinical signs
include weight loss, decreased appetite, and lethargy.

K22463_C021.indd 943

21.27

Figure 21.25–21.27 (21.25) Blastomyces dermatitidis nasal
granuloma on the nares of a young Rottweiler dog. (21.26)
Chest radiograph of the same dog showing a solitary fungal
granuloma in the dog’s lung (arrow). (21.27) Microscopic
appearance of a Blastomyces spore taken on a ‘touch prep’
sample from the dog’s nasal lesion. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

23/04/16 1:28 pm

944

Multisystemic disorders

21.28

Figure 21.28 Cryptococcal granulomas involving the tongue
and nares of this Domestic Shorthair cat. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

21.30

Figure 21.30 A solitary cryptococcal granuloma involving the
nasal cavity and growing outward through the nasal bone of
this 17-year-old diabetic cat. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

21.29

Figure 21.29 Several cryptococccal granulomas on the face of a
cat. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

21.31

Figure 21.31 Granulomas associated with disseminated
histoplasmosis in the kidneys of a dog.
21.32

renal (Figure 21.31) or hepatic failure, and ocular disease
(Figure 21.32), but the signs vary depending on the particular organism involved.

Differential diagnosis
The list of differential diagnoses appropriate for dogs with
clinical signs associated with any of the systemic mycoses
is extensive, depending on the primary organ system(s)
involved. However, cachexia associated with neoplasia
is one of the most important differentials to consider.
Pneumonia, sepsis, enteritis, hepatic insufficiency, and
polyarthritis are among the other differentials that apply.

Diagnosis
Bone marrow and other tissues are important sources for
obtaining samples for a cytologic diagnosis (Figures 21.33,
21.34). In dogs and cats with overt clinical signs and external manifestations of disease, it is practical, in the clinical

K22463_C021.indd 944

Figure 21.32 Subretinal exudates associated with
blastomycosis in a dog.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

setting, to identify the specific organism involved. The
predominant clinical findings and the preferred tissue for
identification of organisms are summarized in Table 21.6.
If it is not possible to identify the specific organism, serologic testing is indicated. However, only a limited number
of laboratories are able to perform serologic testing for
systemic mycoses. Results of serologic testing, regardless
of the causative organisms, must be interpreted carefully,
since the serologic response to infection is variable. The
serum latex agglutination test can be used for detecting
cryptococcal antigen.
Thoracic radiographs are indicated in any dog or cat
suspected of having a systemic mycotic infection. A diffuse, miliary to nodular interstitial pulmonary infiltrate
is a common clinical finding, particularly in animals
with signs of respiratory disease (Figure 21.35). The most
21.33

945

­common sites of biopsy for cytologic evaluation and diagnosis for each of the major systemic mycoses are summarized in Table 21.6.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Over the last 10 years, the introduction of more effective
antifungal agents has greatly improved the prognosis
for those animals fortunate enough to receive treatment.
However, the cost associated with treatment and the
severity of clinical signs associated with the infection
may ultimately determine the prognosis. The treatment
protocols for both dogs and cats infected with each of the
four systemic mycoses described in this section are summarized in Table 21.7.

Prevention
There is currently no vaccine available for any of the systemic fungal infections known to occur in the dog and cat.
Given the ubiquitous nature of the organisms in soil, preventing exposure is extremely difficult in endemic areas.
Chemical decontamination of the soil with formaldehyde
solution is possible, but this is impractical for treating
large areas.

Public health implications

Figure 21.33 Clusters of H. capsulatum in the macrophages in
the bone marrow of dog with diffuse histoplasmosis.

Despite the fact that both humans and animals can be
infected with each of the organisms discussed in this
section, there is no known transmission from dogs or
cats to humans or other animals. None of the systemic
mycoses discussed in this section are considered zoonotic
diseases.

21.34
21.35

Figure 21.34 A cytology specimen stained with new methylene
blue showing Cryptococcus neoformans spores. Note the thick
capsule and the daughter spore. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C021.indd 945

Figure 21.35 Lateral radiograph of a 2-year-old dog with
a diffuse interstitial lung pattern characteristic of mycotic
pneumonia.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

946

Multisystemic disorders

Table 21.6 Summary of the major clinical signs and recommended biopsy sites for systemic mycotic infections in dogs and cats.
Canine

Feline
Recommended biopsy
site

Presenting signs

Recommended biopsy
site

Mycotic infection

Presenting signs

Histoplasmosis

Inappetence, weight loss,
and fever (unresponsive
to antimicrobials).
Large bowel diarrhea
(chronic), hematochezia,
tenesmus.
Hepatomegaly and
splenomegaly.
Diffuse interstitial lung
pattern with increased
hilar density on thoracic
radiographs

Rectal biopsy
(mucosal) or rectal
mucosal scraping.
Bone marrow
aspiration/biopsy.
Fine-needle aspiration
of lung, liver, spleen.
Bronchoalveolar lavage
may be helpful when
other procedures are
not diagnostic

Dyspnea, tachypnea,
possible abnormal lung
sounds.
Enlarged lymph nodes.
Splenomegaly,
hepatomegaly

Bone marrow
aspiration/biopsy.
Fine-needle aspiration
of lung and/or lymph
node

Cryptococcosis

The American Cocker
breed is overrepresented
in North America.
Weight loss and lethargy
(common).
Multifocal CNS signs
predominate: head
tilt, nystagmus, facial
paralysis, paresis, ataxia,
circling, seizures.
Ocular signs include
granulomatous
chorioretinitis, retinal
hemorrhage, and optic
neuritis

Cytologic examination
of CSF and/or
fluid obtained by
paracentesis from the
inside of the eye. New
methylene blue or
Gram stain is preferred
over Wright’s and
India ink

Cryptococcosis is the
most common systemic
mycotic infection in
cats in North America.
Upper respiratory
signs predominate:
sneezing with mucoid
nasal discharge
not responsive to
antimicrobials. A
polypoid mass may
be visible at the
external nares.
Mandibular
lymphadeno-megaly
Subcutaneous papules
or nodules

Cytologic examination
of exudate from the
nose and skin stained
with new methylene
blue or Gram stain is
preferred over Wright’s
and India ink

Blastomycosis

Lymphadenomegaly,
lethargy, anorexia and
weight loss.
Dry, adventitial lung
sounds, with variable
cough.
Interstitial lung pattern
Uveitis and retinal
detachment are seen in
up to 40% of dogs.
Multifocal subcutaneous
abscesses.
Lameness associated with
fungal osteomyelitis may
be the only presenting
sign in up to 30% of dogs

Fine-needle aspiration
of enlarged lymph
nodes and other
affected body sites.
Cytopathology of skin
lesions or exudate
(conventional stains
may be used)

Uncommon in cats.
When present, signs
are similar to those
seen in dogs.
Dyspnea, weight loss,
draining skin lesions,
and visual impairment
are most commonly
reported

Fine-needle aspiration
of enlarged lymph
nodes and other
afected body sites.
Cytopathology of skin
lesions or exudate
(conventional stains
may be used)

(continued )

K22463_C021.indd 946

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

Canine
Mycotic infection

Presenting signs

Coccidioidomycosis

Fever, decreased
appetite, and weight loss
are common.
Cough with mild to
inapparent respiratory
tract infection.
Draining skin lesions.
Keratitis, uveitis, acute
blindness.
Lameness associated
with long bone pain
and bone swelling (may
be associated with a
draining tract in skin

947

Feline
Recommended biopsy
site
Skin biopsy involving
tissue affected with
microabscesses.
Multiple biopsies may
be required.
Note: Attempting
to culture C. immitis
in practice is not
recommended

Presenting signs
Similar to the dog.
Skin lesions without
evidence of a bone
lesion are most
common.
Respiratory signs are
rare

Recommended biopsy
site
Skin biopsy involving
tissue affected with
microabscesses.
Multiple biopsies may
be required.
Note: Attempting
to culture C. immitis
in practice is not
recommended

Table 21.7 Recommended and alternative treatment protocols for systemic mycotic infections in dogs and cats.
Mycotic infection

Canine

Feline

Histoplasmosis

Itraconazole (10 mg/kg PO q12–24h for 4–6 months; oral
solution is recommended).
Alternatives:
Fluconazole (2.5–5.0 mg/kg PO q12–24 for 4–6 months)
or
amphotericin B (deoxycholate) (0.25–0.5 mg/kg IV only
administered on alternate days until a cumulative dose of
5–10 mg/kg is achieved)

Itraconazole (10 mg/kg PO q12h for
4–6 months (oral solution is recommended).
Alternatives:
Fluconazole (2.5–5.0 mg/kg PO q12–24 for
4–6 months)
or
amphotericin B (deoxychoIate)
(0.25–0.5 mg/kg IV only administered on
alternate days until a cumulative dose of
4–8 mg/kg is achieved)

Cryptococcosis

Fluconazole (5–15 mg/kg PO q12–24h for at least 6 and
up to 18 months).
Alternatives:
Flucytosine (50–75 mg/kg PO q8h for 1–12 months plus
amphotericin B (deoxycholate) (0.25–0.5 mg/kg IV only
administered on alternate days until a cumulative dose of
5–10 mg/kg is achieved). (Recommended for patients with
CNS involvement.)
Note: Amphotericin B is the only drug that is fungicidal

Itraconazole (10–20 mg/kg PO q24h for at
least 6 and up to 18 months).
Alternatives:
Fluconazole (2.5–5.0 mg/kg PO q12–24h for
6–10 months)
or
flucytosine (75 mg/kg PO q12h for 1–9
months) plus amphotericin B (deoxychoIate)
(0.1–0.5 mg/kg IV only administered on
alternate days until a cumulative dose of
4–8 mg/kg is achieved). (Recommended for
patients with CNS involvement.)
Note: Amphotericin B is the only drug that is
fungicidal

Blastomycosis

Itraconazole (5 mg/kg PO q12h for 5 days, then 5 mg/kg
q24h for 2 months or at least until 1 month following
resolution of signs.
Alternatives:
Fluconazole (5 mg/kg PO q12h for 2 months or at least
until 1 month following resolution of signs)

Itraconazole (5 mg/kg PO q12h for 2 months
or at least until 1 month following resolution
of signs)

(continued )

K22463_C021.indd 947

23/04/16 1:28 pm

948

Multisystemic disorders

Table 21.7 Recommended and alternative treatment protocols for systemic mycotic infections in dogs and cats. (Continued)
Mycotic infection

Coccidioidomycosis

Canine

Feline

or
amphotericin B (deoxychoIate) (0.25–0.5 mg/kg IV only
administered on alternate days until a cumulative dose of
5–10 mg/kg is achieved)

Alternative:
Amphotericin B (deoxycholate)
(0.1–0.5 mg/kg IV only administered
on alternate days until a cumulative dose of
4–8 mg/kg is achieved)

Ketoconazole (5–15 mg/kg PO q12h for 8–12 months).
Alternatives:
Amphotericin B (deoxychoIate) (0.25–0.5 mg/kg IV only
administered on alternate days until a cumulative dose of
5–10 mg/kg is achieved)
or
Itraconazole (5 mg/kg PO q12h for 8–12 months)

Ketoconazole (50 mg [total] PO q12h; expect
to treat for up to 12 months).
Alternative:
Itraconazole (25–50 mg [total] PO q12–24h
for 8–12 months)

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (2010) (eds.) Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 7th edn. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.
Greene CE (2011) (ed.) Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat,
4th edn. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.
King LG (2004) (ed.) Textbook of Respiratory Disease in Dogs and
Cats. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.
Plumb DC (2015) (ed.) Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook,
8th edn. Blackwell Publishing, Ames.

Part 2: The cat
Annette Litster

BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
FELINE ACTINOMYCOSIS AND NOCARDIOSIS
Definition/overview
Actinomycosis and nocardiosis are rare chronic i­ nfections,
reported in both dogs and cats, caused by a variety of
anaerobic (actinomycosis) and aerobic (nocardiosis)
actinomycetes.

Etiology
Actinomyces spp. and Nocardia spp. are branching,
filamentous, gram-positive bacteria. The organisms
are ubiquitous and can be found in the oral cavity of
cats as well as in soil. Infections are opportunistic and
usually occur subsequent to mechanical disruption of
mucosal barriers, such as inoculation of skin with contaminated plant material or, less often, bite wounds.

K22463_C021.indd 948

Actinomycosis is more prevalent, especially in cats, than
nocardiosis.

Pathophysiology
Entry and spread of infection depend on the host’s immunocompetence. In both infections, hematologic and biochemical findings are nonspecific and typical of any
pyogenic inflammatory process. There is usually a leukocytosis with a left shift.

Clinical presentation
Feline actinomycosis
Feline actinomycosis is most often associated with subcutaneous cat bite abscess formation or pyothorax. A viscous, opaque exudate is characteristic.

Feline nocardiosis
Feline nocardiosis infections are characterized by suppurative or pyogranulomatous inflammation that can be
localized (cutaneous–subcutaneous, pulmonary) or disseminated (systemic). The cutaneous form is the most
common and often presents as fistulous tracts with serosanguineous discharge.

Differential diagnosis
Penetrating (subcutaneous) injury and neoplasia are
among the most important differential diagnoses for
actinomycosis. Pneumonia (bacterial, parasitic, viral,
or protozoal [toxoplasmosis]) is an important differential diagnosis for nocardiosis. As Actinomyces spp. and
Nocardia spp. are opportunistic pathogens, all infected
cats should be tested for feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV).

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

949

21.36

Diagnosis
Feline actinomycosis
Recovery of multiple bacterial pathogens from the exudate
is common. Cytology of the exudate may reveal so-called
sulfur granules, which can occasionally be visualized without microscopy (Figures 21.36, 21.37). Cytologic assessment
of exudates is complicated by the presence of mixed bacterial populations. Actinomyces in the exudate may be difficult
to visualize, but they should appear as gram-positive filamentous organisms. Attempts to culture Actinomyces spp.
from exudates are complicated by bacterial overgrowth.
In addition, specimens need to be processed anaerobically.
However, the high degree of susceptibility of Actinomyces to
antimicrobial therapy could preclude the need to confirm
the antimicrobial susceptibility profile.

Feline nocardiosis
Although local infections can cause abscess formation containing the gram-positive filamentous organisms, the presence of mixed bacterial populations from subcutaneous
abscesses is, unlike actinomycosis, rare. Microscopically,
filaments are finer than fungal filaments (<1 μm) and can
be identified using Bourke’s modification of Gram stain.
Filaments do not stain with Romanowsky stains.

21.37

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Both diseases are best treated with surgical drainage
and débridement of affected areas, except in cases where
infection is disseminated. Treatment with antimicrobials
is essential for weeks to months because of the limited
drug penetration of granulomas.

Feline actinomycosis
Penicillin G (100,000 U/kg IV or SC q6–8h) or penicillin V (phenoxymethyl penicillin, 40 mg/kg PO q8h) is
the recommended treatment for feline actinomycosis.
Antimicrobial penetration of the granulomas is difficult
and, therefore, dictates extended therapy. Once effective
drainage has been established, treatment should continue for a minimum of 2 weeks or as long as necessary
for clinical and microbiological cure. Once treatment has
been initiated, the volume of discharge is frequently
reduced. The clinician should attempt to identify the
extent of draining tracts and the possibility of a foreign
body within the wound site or tract. Treatment is significantly complicated by infections associated with migrating foreign bodies. Animals that fail to respond to initial
drainage and antimicrobial therapy should undergo
exploratory surgery in an attempt to identify the underlying cause. Assuming that effective drainage can be

K22463_C021.indd 949

Figures 21.36, 21.37 (21.36) Suppurative exudate containing
‘sulfur’ granules, taken from a feline patient with suppurative
pleuritis caused by Actinomyces infection, is shown in the
syringe. (21.37) The cat in 21.36 is having thoracic exudate
aspirated through chest tubes.

established, the inciting foreign material removed, and
antibiotic therapy administered appropriately, the prognosis for cure is excellent.

Feline nocardiosis
Feline nocardiosis has a considerably poorer prognosis
than actinomycosis. Sulfonamides are the recommended
drugs in the management of nocardiosis (sulfadiazine
80 mg/kg PO q8h and sulfisoxazole 50 mg/kg PO q8h).
Doxycycline (5–10 mg/kg PO q12–24h, with water to follow), in combination with amoxicillin (20 mg/kg PO q12h)
and/or clarithromycin (62.5–125 mg/cat PO q12h) and
amikacin (15–20 mg/kg IV q24h) have also been used to

23/04/16 1:28 pm

950

Multisystemic disorders

treat feline nocardiosis. Amoxicillin–clavulanate and
fluoroquinolones are not effective. Although response
to therapy may be noted within 7–10 days following
the onset of treatment, extended treatment periods of
2 months or longer are usually required. In addition to
potential adverse reactions to long-term sulfonamide
administration, not all nocardial isolates are sensitive
to sulfonamides. Cats that do not have easily resectable
nocardial lesions have an extremely poor prognosis.

Prevention
There is currently no vaccine on the market for the prevention of either actinomycosis or nocardiosis in cats.

Public health implications
Although human cases of actinomycosis and nocardiosis
are reported, human infections are not directly transmitted
from infected dogs or cats. Individuals handling material
from draining wounds should use normal routine precautions to avoid inadvertent contact with ­infectious material.

unresponsiveness to environmental stimuli, and mild
postural reaction deficits in all limbs. In all cases the
clinical signs resolved without the administration of
antimicrobial therapy. Chronically bacteremic cats are
typically healthy, as cats act as reservoirs of infection
for the host-adapted B. henselae. A number of studies have attempted to link clinical signs or laboratory
abnormalities with Bartonella seropositivity, including
hyperglobulinemia, urinary tract disease, hematuria,
CNS disease, and osteoarthritis, but the strength of evidence in these reports has been variable. Additionally,
response to treatment for Bartonella has been documented in case reports of feline uveitis, endocarditis,
and myocarditis.

Differential diagnosis

FELINE BARTONELLOSIS

Since experimental infections have demonstrated transient pyrexia, mild anemia, localized or generalized
lymphadenopathy, and/or mild CNS signs, bartonellosis
could reasonably be included in the differential diagnosis
list for cats with any of those presenting signs. FeLV and
FIV testing is indicated.

Definition/overview

Diagnosis

Feline bartonellosis is generally attributed to infection
with the bacteria Bartonella (previously Rochalimaea), and
the most common isolate in cats is B. henselae. Although
infected cats rarely show obvious clinical signs of illness,
the relationship between feline B. henselae infection and
human cat scratch disease (CSD) has prompted intensive
research. Over 20 species of Bartonella are now recognized
worldwide, although their role as pathogens in feline and
human disease is still poorly understood.

Seropositivity (IFA or ELISA) is common among healthy
cats and generally only denotes prior exposure to any of
several genetic varieties of Bartonellae. Therefore, serology is more useful to exclude Bartonella from the differential diagnosis list. Currently, blood or tissue culture
remains the preferred means of confirming the diagnosis, but these tests might need to be performed repeatedly
to avoid false-negative results. Positive serologic results
do not appear to be related to bacteremia. PCR testing
can be performed on blood, aqueous humor, oropharyngeal swabs, and CSF or tissue aspirates, and submission
of multiple specimen types from a single case increases
test sensitivity.

Etiology
Bartonellae are small, gram-negative bacteria that are
arthropod (flea) transmitted. Studies of cats infected with
B. henselae and B. clarridgeiae have demonstrated transmission of infection between cats by fleas; transmission of
B. henselae by the tick Ixodes ricinus has also been reported.

Pathophysiology
A prolonged (>1 year), fluctuating bacteremia occurs in
infected cats, which are usually young (<2 years old). When
the infection is first acquired, animals may have a transient
lymphadenopathy and low-grade fever. Despite the duration of bacteremia, there seem to be no long-lasting effects.

Clinical presentation
In the small number of feline cases documented, bartonellosis was described as a self-limiting, febrile illness lasting for 2–3 days, with clinical signs of lethargy,

K22463_C021.indd 950

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Although marbofloxacin (5 mg/kg PO q12–24h for
6 weeks) or doxycycline (10 mg/kg PO q12–24h for
2–4 weeks; give 5 ml water or food immediately following
administration) is the recommended treatment, failure to
clear infection is still common. Azithromycin (10 mg/kg
PO q24h for 7 days, followed by 10 mg/kg PO q48h for
6–12 weeks) and amoxicillin–clavulanate (62.5 mg/kg PO
q12h for 2 months) have also been reported to resolve
infection. However, because clinical disease is seldom
associated with infection, the value of treating infected
cats may be limited to households in which cats reside
with immunocompromised humans.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

951

Prevention

Pathophysiology

There is currently no vaccine available for b
­ artonellosis
in cats. However, effective flea and tick management is
deemed to be a prudent means of minimizing the risk of
infection. Blood donors should be screened for Bartonella
antibodies.

B. bronchiseptica is especially well adapted to colonize the
respiratory tract. Systemic infection is rare. In all species,
B. bronchiseptica colonizes the ciliated respiratory epithelial cells in the trachea and nasal cavity. Both endotoxins
and exotoxins are released and these, together with other
injury, cause stasis of respiratory cilia, significantly compromising clearance mechanisms (mucociliary apparatus).

Public health implications
A variety of clinical disorders in humans (e.g. bacillary
angiomatosis, bacillary peliosis, relapsing fever, neuroretinitis, uveitis, endocarditis, and neurologic disorders), as
well as CSD, have been associated with Bartonella spp. infection. Infections are most profound in people with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and other causes
of immunosuppression. Although infections do develop in
immunocompetent individuals, these infections tend to be
subclinical or localized to regional lymph nodes.
There is a strong relationship between B. henselae infection and human CSD. Despite the fact that CSD in humans
has for years been associated with cat scratches, there is
considerable speculation as to the actual means of transmission between cats and humans. Currently it appears
that feline saliva is not an effective means of transmitting B.
henselae to humans. However, there is increased awareness
of the important role played by fleas in human infections,
so the risk of exposure to arthropod vectors, not only to
cats, should be considered in suspected human infections.

FELINE BORDETELLOSIS
Definition/overview
Documentation that Bordetella bronchiseptica is a
­significant and primary respiratory disease of cats is
distinctly lacking in the clinical literature, although its
status as a primary pathogen has been documented in
experimental infections of specific pathogen free cats.
The most compelling evidence supporting B. bronchiseptica as a respiratory pathogen in naturally infected
cats is limited predominantly to clusters of kittens with
concurrent viral upper respiratory infection, especially
calicivirus. In these cases B. bronchiseptica infection was
associated with severe, frequently fatal, bronchopneumonia in kittens. Bordetellosis could also be considered
in the differential diagnosis list for cats presented with
acute or chronic coughing.

Etiology
B. bronchiseptica is an aerobic, gram-negative coccobacillus associated with respiratory infections in a variety of
species, including humans, dogs, and pigs. The organism
is frequently found as part of the normal oral and respiratory flora in cats.

K22463_C021.indd 951

Clinical presentation
The predominant clinical signs include cough, fever,
sneezing, purulent nasal discharge, and regional
­lymphadenomegaly (Figures 21.38, 21.39). Clinical
21.38

Figure 21.38 The upper respiratory signs associated with
Bordetella infection are difficult to distinguish from other causes
of feline infectious respiratory disease such as feline calicivirus
or feline herpesvirus. (Courtesy M. Schaer and C. Steers)
21.39

Figure 21.39 CT of the nasal and sinus areas of a Siamese cat
with chronic rhinosinusitis and positive bacterial culture results
for Bordetella spp. Note the absence of turbinates, perhaps
due to the destructive nature of a primary feline herpesvirus
infection , which is particularly visible on the right side
(arrowhead). (Courtesy M. Schaer)

23/04/16 1:28 pm

952

Multisystemic disorders

signs are reported to resolve within 10 days, assuming
­co-infections and/or complications of pneumonia do not
develop. Kittens appear to be most prone to developing
bronchopneumonia ­
associated with feline bordetellosis. Clinical signs include ­dyspnea, cyanosis, and death.
Coughing is more likely to be reported in kittens with
bordetellosis than in adults.

Differential diagnosis
Clinical illness associated with bordetellosis is
characteristically associated with other respiratory
­
pathogens such as feline calicivirus (FCV) or feline herpesvirus (FHV). Other differential diagnoses include cleft
palate associated with aspiration pneumonia and bacterial ­pneumonia (e.g. Mycoplasma felis).

Diagnosis
It is possible to isolate B. bronchiseptica from respiratory
secretions in the oropharynx, nasal cavity, or conjunctival sulcus of kittens and cats with upper respiratory disease, either by bacterial culture or PCR testing. However,
B. bronchiseptica is commonly recovered from healthy
cats; therefore, positive bacterial culture or PCR test
results, or a positive antibody titer, do not constitute
­diagnostic confirmation.

Management
B. bronchiseptica is susceptible to commonly used disinfectants. In a multi-cat household or shelter, stress management, including reduction of overcrowding to reduce
disease transmission and thorough cleaning and disinfection to reduce fomite transmission of upper respiratory pathogens, should be instituted.

Treatment/prognosis
Several antimicrobial agents are appropriate for use
in kittens and cats with clinical signs associated with
B. ­bronchiseptica. Considering the potential for kittens
concurrently infected with viral upper respiratory
infection (e.g. FCV or FHV), antimicrobial therapy is
justified in affected kittens to prevent development of
bronchopneumonia. Doxycycline (5–10 mg/kg PO q12–
24h, with 5 ml water to follow; permanently stained
dentition is a possible adverse effect in young kittens),
amoxicillin–clavulanate (62.5 mg/kg PO q12h) and
pradofloxacin (10 mg/kg PO q24h for 7 days) all have
published efficacy in the treatment of feline bordetellosis. In both dogs and cats, B. bronchiseptica can persist
for as long as 12 weeks following the initial infection.
Extended treatment durations of 4 weeks or longer are
not unusual.

K22463_C021.indd 952

Prevention
In the USA, a live, avirulent B. bronchiseptica vaccine has
been licensed for topical (intranasal) administration in
cats and kittens. Considering the overall low incidence of
clinical disease and the difficulty in documenting infections attributable to B. bronchiseptica in kittens, it is currently recommended that this vaccine be limited to use
in multi-cat households where there are documented
clinical infections with B. bronchiseptica, either as a single pathogen, or as a comorbid infection with FHV and/
or FCV. Currently, there appears to be little indication
for the routine vaccination of adult cats against feline
B. b
­ ronchiseptica (Tables 21.8 and 21.9).

Public health implications
Although there are limited reports of B. bronchiseptica
infections occurring in people, some of which included
exposure to dogs, there is no evidence to support direct
transmission from cats to humans. However, transmission between cats and dogs has been documented using
molecular techniques.

MYCOPLASMA FELIS INFECTION
Definition/overview
Mycoplasma felis has been isolated from the upper respiratory tracts of cats with clinical signs of upper respiratory tract disease and also from healthy cats. Whether
acting as a primary pathogen or secondary opportunistic
invader, Mycoplasma spp. are important infectious agents
in feline upper respiratory tract disease.

Etiology
Mycoplasma spp. are degenerate, obligatory parasitic
intracellular bacteria, bound by a single limiting cell
membrane. Mycoplasma spp. have been recovered from
the normal flora of the upper respiratory tract, conjunctiva, and genital tract of cats. In addition, M. felis has also
been implicated as the cause of upper respiratory tract
disease, conjunctivitis, and polyarthritis.

Pathophysiology
Mycoplasma infections are generally spread by direct contact or fomite transmission. They often act as opportunistic pathogens where cats are stressed or overcrowded, or
when there are comorbid infections.

Clinical presentation
The most common clinical signs are upper respiratory
and ocular: sneezing, nasal discharge, conjunctivitis, and/
or ocular discharge. Pyrexia and inappetence can occur.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

953

Table 21.8 Initial vaccination of cats/kittens (based on the 2013 AAFP Feline Vaccination Advisory Panel Report).
Core vaccines

Administration

First booster

MLV panleukopenia +
MLV herpesvirus +
MLV calicivirus.
Note: When feasible, avoid the use of
killed (adjuvanted) vaccines in cats

Primary kitten (≤16 weeks of age) series:
administer 1 dose as early as 6 weeks
of age, then every 3–4 weeks until
16 weeks of age. Can give an additional
dose at 20 weeks of age where risk of
exposure is high.
Primary adult (>16 weeks of age):
administer 2 doses 3–4 weeks apart

Not later than 1 year following the last
dose in the initial series.
Note: Annual booster of cats against
FHV-1 and FCV may be recommended in
cats housed in high risk environments

Recombinant rabies
(nonadjuvanted)
(now available as 1-year and 3-year
products)
or
killed rabies (adjuvanted) (available as
1-year and 3-year products)

Single dose usually given at
12–16 weeks of age.
(State/Local/Provincial law applies)

Administer a single dose 1 year following
administration of the initial dose.
(State/Local/Provincial law applies)

Noncore vaccines

Administration

Booster recommendations

Recombinant feline leukemia virus
(nonadjuvanted);
also available as killed feline leukemia
virus (adjuvanted)

‘Highly recommended’ for all kittens
Give 2 doses at 12 and 16 weeks of
age followed by a booster 1 year after
completion of the initial series

Where risk of exposure exists, administer
a single dose annually thereafter.
(Some authors recommend revaccination
every 2 years for cats considered to be at
‘low risk’ for exposure)

Killed feline immunodeficiency virus
(only available as a killed-adjuvanted
vaccine).
Note: This vaccine is not recommended
by the World Small Animal Veterinary
Association

3 initial doses, 2–4 weeks apart, if
indicated

Note: Initial vaccination can cause a falsepositive FIV test result on ALL commercial
FIV tests for several years. Kittens having
nursed from a vaccinated cat may also
have a false-positive test result if tested
prior to 6 months of age

Feline Bordetella bronchiseptica
(attenuated live intranasal
(nonadjuvanted vaccine)

A single dose, administered intranasally,
as early as 4 weeks of age, if indicated

Booster annually where there is
documented risk of exposure
Indications for use of this product are
limited

Chlamydia felis
(both nonadjuvanted and adjuvanted
products are available)

2 initial doses 3–4 weeks apart, if
indicated

Booster annually where there is
documented risk of exposure
Indications for use of this product are
limited

Virulent systemic calicivirus
(killed-adjuvanted)

2 initial doses 2–4 weeks apart, if
indicated

Disease prevalence is considered low,
even within high-density housing
environments (e.g. shelters)

AAFP, American Association of Feline Practitioners; MLV, modified live virus.
Note:
•• Unless specifically indicated for intranasal administration, all feline vaccines should be administered by the SC route.
•• The feline infectious peritonitis vaccine has been recategorized as noncore.
•• The World Small Animal Veterinary Association (Vaccine Guidelines Group) does not recommend administration of either the
feline infectious peritonitis or the feline immunodeficiency virus vaccine, on grounds of low to no demonstrated efficacy.
•• Inactivated (killed), adjuvanted vaccines are only indicated for administration to pregnant queens, and retrovirus (FeLV or FIV)
infected cats.

K22463_C021.indd 953

23/04/16 1:28 pm

954

Multisystemic disorders

Table 21.9 Booster recommendations for adult cats.
•• Core vaccines (MLV panleukopenia + herpesvirus + calicivirus): administer a single dose every 3 years following completion of
the initial kitten series and the first booster.
•• Recombinant (nonadjuvanted) rabies: a 1-year product and a 3-year product are currently available; administer in accordance
with State, Local, or Provincial law.
•• (Alternative) killed (adjuvanted) rabies: administered in accordance with State, Local, or Provincial law.
•• Noncore vaccines (FeLV): recommended every 1 (or 2) years if risk is sustained (i.e. outdoor cats with reasonable risk of
encounter with other cats). The parenteral recombinant FeLV (rFeLV) vaccine is not adjuvanted; all other FeLV vaccines contain
adjuvant. (Note: Recommendations for booster intervals of FeLV vaccine in adult cats vary from ‘annually’ to ‘every 3 years’,
regardless of the product used. Consult individual vaccine manufacturers for further brand-specific information and details of
post-vaccination support provided.)
•• Other noncore vaccines are seldom administered and should be considered only after assessing and defining a clear risk of
exposure. All other noncore vaccines are recommended for annual administration as long as the risk of exposure persists.

Lower respiratory infections have also been reported,
accompanied by coughing, bronchopneumonia, and/or
suppurative bronchitis.

Differential diagnosis
The most common pathogens causing upper respiratory
tract disease in cats are FHV-1, FCV, M. felis, Bordetella
bronchiseptica, and Chlamydia felis. Other causes of feline
pneumonia include bacterial, fungal, and parasitic pathogens, aspiration pneumonia, and neoplasia.

Diagnosis
Commercially available PCR testing is thought to be the
most sensitive diagnostic tool available and it specifically
detects M. felis, thereby avoiding false-positive results due
to the presence of other Mycoplasma spp. Because of their
fastidious nature and limited ability for survival outside
the host, bacterial culture of Mycoplasma spp. is challenging, requiring rapid transport, special culture techniques,
and prolonged incubation periods of up to 3 weeks.

Management
Stress management is paramount to environmental control, and special attention should be given to reducing
overcrowding to reduce disease transmission. Thorough
cleaning and disinfection is required to reduce fomite
transmission of upper respiratory pathogens. M. felis is
susceptible to routine disinfectants.

Treatment/prognosis
Doxycycline (5–10 mg/kg PO q12–24h; 5 ml water should
be administered after every dose; permanently stained
dentition is a possible adverse effect in young kittens) is
the treatment of choice. Prolonged courses (up to 6 weeks)
might be necessary to reduce pathogen load to undetectable levels using quantitative PCR testing, but clinical resolution of infection typically occurs in 1–2 weeks. M. felis
also has published in-vitro and in-vivo susceptibility to

K22463_C021.indd 954

fluoroquinolones such as marbofloxacin (5 mg/kg PO
q12–24h for 6 weeks).
There are no antimicrobial regimens that are proven
to clear infection and M. felis persists in the host for
extended periods, resisting clearance using intracellular localization, immunomodulatory effects, and surface
antigen variations. For this reason, clinical resolution
might be more important than achieving negative PCR
results post-treatment.

Prevention
Population management is the main prevention tool in
multi-cat environments. There are currently no vaccines
available for the prevention of M. felis infection.

Public health implications
There have been isolated case reports of human infections
with M. felis, but the vast majority of human Mycoplasma
infections have been due to Mycoplasma spp. not found in
cats or dogs.

FELINE CHLAMYDIOSIS (FELINE
‘PNEUMONITIS’)
(See also Chapter 19: Ocular manifestations of systemic
diseases.)

Definition/overview
Feline chlamydiosis is caused by the obligate intra­
cellular gram-negative organism Chlamydia felis. The
organism, which is relatively unstable outside the host,
is associated with upper respiratory and ocular (conjunctival) infections. Limited studies suggest that chlamydiosis infection comprises approximately 5% of upper
respiratory infections in cats in the USA. In the UK, it is
estimated that up to 30% of respiratory disease in cats is
associated with C. felis infection.

23/04/16 1:28 pm

Infectious diseases

Etiology
Genomic classification of Chlamydiaceae had divided this
family into two genera: Chlamydophila and Chlamydia.
However, full genome sequencing has resulted in a recommendation to revert to a single genus, Chlamydia.

Pathophysiology
There is still limited information on the pathogenesis of
this infection in cats; however, chronic infections, particularly among households of cats, have been documented.
C. felis has been isolated from experimentally infected
cats for periods of up to 18 months, suggesting the development of a carrier state subsequent to recovery.

Clinical presentation
Despite the common name, feline ‘pneumonitis’, C. felis
infection in cats is most commonly associated with
unilateral or bilateral conjunctivitis and chemosis
(Figure 21.40). Occasional sneezing (much less than that
associated with viral upper respiratory disease) is also
reported. Although the organism can disseminate and
has been found in the GI and reproductive tracts, clinical signs associated with dissemination are not reported.
Currently, there is no known direct association between
C. felis infection and feline reproductive disease.

Differential diagnosis
Infections with FHV, FCV, Bordetella bronchiseptica, and/or
Mycoplasma felis; conjunctival injury.

Diagnosis
PCR detection of C. felis from conjunctival swabs is the preferred method of diagnosis. Since the organism is intracellular, it is important to submit swabs that ­contain sufficient
cellular material. Cotton swabs with plastic stems should
21.40

955

be used; plain sterile tubes without ­transport medium
are required for transport. Cats suspected of having chlamydiosis could also be tested for FeLV and FIV infection.
Direct cytologic examination of conjunctival swabs
for basophilic intracytoplasmic inclusions has been previously described. However, specimens are only likely
to be positive early in the infection, so false-negative
cytologic findings are common. Confusion with other
causes of basophilic inclusions can also occur, resulting in
false-positive results.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Tetracyclines are regarded as the most effective antibiotics for use against C. felis infection in cats. Because this
organism is known to disseminate, both topical and systemic treatment are recommended. For conjunctivitis,
tetracycline ophthalmic drops are preferred over chlortetracycline ophthalmic drops. Both eyes should be treated
four times daily for 7–10 days. Oral doxycycline (5–10 mg/
kg q24h for at least 4 weeks, or at least 2 weeks after clinical resolution, whichever is longer) can also be given. Oral
doxycycline should be followed with 5 ml of water when
administering this antimicrobial to cats. Azithromycin
treatment has not been shown to completely eliminate
C. felis infection and is not currently recommended.

Prevention
The most effective means of preventing chlamydiosis in
cats is to limit exposure of susceptible kittens and cats to
any cat with signs of respiratory or conjunctival disease.
However, within catteries, animal shelters, and boarding
catteries, preventing contact with infected carrier cats
may be difficult or impossible to achieve. Currently, all
available C. felis vaccines approved for use in cats must be
administered parenterally (Tables 21.8 and 21.9); accidental ocular inoculation of modified live vaccines against
C. felis can result in typical signs of infection. These vaccines appear to give reasonable protection against clinical signs of disease, but not against infection. The current
recommendation for administration of C. felis vaccine is
limited to those cats with known or suspected risk of exposure. The vaccine is recommended for administration to
cats with documented risk of exposure to Chlamydia.

Public health implications

Figure 21.40 Bilateral conjunctivitis in a 2-year-old cat with
chlamydiosis.

K22463_C021.indd 955

C. felis is generally regarded as a pathogen unique to the
cat. Isolated reports of human infection with feline C. felis
have raised concern regarding its potential as a zoonotic
infection. However, the few reports of human infection
are limited to minor, self-limiting conjunctivitis. C. felis is

23/04/16 1:29 pm

956

Multisystemic disorders

not regarded as an important zoonotic disease. Human
Chlamydia psittaci infections are generally acquired from
birds rather than cats or dogs.

Clinical presentation

(See also Chapter 16: Hematologic disorders.)

While acute infections are often associated with significant
anemia, many cats with chronic infections experience only
mild anemia and manifest few, if any, clinical signs. When
clinical signs are present, they are most likely related to
anemia (i.e. weakness, lethargy, pallor, and splenomegaly).
Cats are only occasionally noted to be icteric (Figure 21.41).

Definition/overview

Differential diagnosis

Mycoplasma haemofelis (formerly Haemobartonella felis)
belongs to a genus of gram-negative, non-acid-fast, epicellular parasites of red blood cells (RBCs). Acute infections
are characterized by rapid-onset hemolytic anemia, hence
the name ‘infectious anemia’. While chronic M. haemofelis
infection is characterized by episodes of fluctuating parasitemia, clinical anemia does not usually occur in the
absence of comorbidities. Persistent Coombs-positive autoagglutination by antibodies bound to RBCs can be found
in cats with acute anemia due to M. haemofelis infection.
Other variants of hemoplasmas known to infect cats are
Candidatus Mycoplasma ‘haemominutum’ and Candidatus
Mycoplasma ‘turicensis’. However, infections with these
species appear to be subclinical in cats; infections with
more than one hemoplasma species are relatively common. Retrovirus (FeLV and FIV) infection appears to be
a risk factor for hemoplasma infection and co-infections
with retroviruses are likely to increase the clinical severity of disease.

Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, erythroid hypoplasia, or aplasia, in addition to FeLV and FIV, are not only
important differential diagnoses, but each may occur
concurrently with M. haemofelis infection.

HEMOPLASMAS (HEMOTROPIC M
­ YCOPLASMAS)

Etiology
The disease is thought to be transmitted predominantly
by fleas, although conclusive evidence has not yet been
published. Older, male nonpedigree cats are at higher
risk of infection and outdoor roaming and the presence
of cat fight abscesses has also been associated with infection. Direct cat-to-cat infection by casual contact, such as
mutual grooming, is thought to be unlikely, while transfusion of blood from apparently healthy carrier cats is an
effective means of transmitting M. haemofelis.

Diagnosis
Hematologic changes are the most important laboratory
findings in clinical hemoplasmosis. Significant anemia
(hematocrit 0.2 l/l [20%] and frequently <0.1 l/l [10%])
and associated lethargy are characteristic. Organisms
are recognized in stained blood films in only about 50%
of cats during the acute phase of infection. Leukocyte
and platelet counts are usually normal. The bone marrow myeloid to erythroid ratio is typically normal (1:1)
during the early stage of the disease, but may decrease
later. RBC autoagglutination may be observed in anticoagulated whole blood during acute hemoplasmosis.
A direct Coombs test may also be positive at this time.
Definitive diagnosis of M. haemofelis infection is based
on the demonstration of organisms in peripheral blood
(Figure 21.42). A blood film stained with a Romanowskytype stain (e.g. Wright, Giemsa, Diff-Quik®) is recommended. Since organisms can detach themselves from
erythrocytes during storage, it is recommended that blood
21.41

Pathophysiology
Acute M. haemofelis infection is associated with significant
morbidity and can be fatal if left untreated. Cats that ultimately recover from acute infections remain chronically
infected for years. Depending on the intrinsic immunologic
and phagocytic responses, chronic carrier cats may manifest small numbers of organisms on the surface of RBCs,
or may manifest no evidence of infection until stressed
(e.g. chronic corticosteroid therapy, FeLV/FIV-positive status). Sequestration in the spleen or liver at times of low circulating organism numbers has not been demonstrated.

K22463_C021.indd 956

Figure 21.41 Necropsy of a 1-year-old cat with severe
hemolytic anemia associated with severe acute Mycoplasma
haemofelis infection. Icterus was marked and was accompanied
by hepatic lipidosis.

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Infectious diseases

21.42

957

However, there is no published evidence for the efficacy
of glucocorticoid treatment and some case reports have
shown efficacy with antimicrobial treatment alone.
The prognosis for uncomplicated M. haemofelis infection
in cats is good, assuming that treatment can be administered and is tolerated by the cat. However, the correlation
of clinical hemoplasmosis with retrovirus infection justifies routine testing of anemic cats for FeLV and FIV.

Prevention

Figure 21.42 Peripheral blood smear from a cat demonstrating
faint staining Mycoplasma haemofelis on the red blood cell
surface.

Since fleas are thought to be involved in the transmission
of feline hemoplasmosis, a flea control program should be
instituted. Additionally, prevention of cat fight abscesses
might also reduce risk. There is currently no vaccine
available for cats or dogs against hemoplasmosis.

Public health implications
smears be made immediately upon collection. Artifacts
such as Howell–Jolly bodies and other hemotropic organisms, such as Candidatus Mycoplasma ‘haemominutum’ or
Candidatus Mycoplasma ‘turicensis’, might be interpreted
as M. haemofelis on visual examination of stained blood
smears, resulting in false-positive results. It is not possible
to differentiate between hemoplasma species cytologically.
However, PCR assays based on 16S rRNA gene detection can
enable speciation and be either conventional (nonquantitative; PCR) or real-time (qualitative; qPCR).

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Transfusion of whole blood is generally recommended
in cats with hematocrits <0.15 l/l (15%). This is particularly important in cats with clinical signs associated with
acute-onset anemia.
Both doxycycline (5 mg/kg PO q12h for 2–6 weeks,
followed at each administration by 5 ml water) and fluoroquinolones (marbofloxacin 2 mg/kg PO q24h for
4 weeks; pradofloxacin 10 mg/kg PO q24h 21 days) have
been recommended for the treatment of M. haemofelis infection in cats. Because of the highly fluctuating
nature of M. haemofelis parasitemia, a reduction in organism load on qPCR cannot be interpreted as response to
treatment. Pradofloxacin can also be used for refractory cases or when reduction in circulating load needs
to be maximized. Since no treatment regimen has been
shown to clear infection, the treatment of subclinically
infected cats is not currently recommended. As a means
of reducing the immune-mediated components of clinical disease, administration of prednisolone (1–2 mg/kg
PO q12h for at least 7–10 days) might be indicated to
augment resolution of anemia due to hemophagocytosis.

K22463_C021.indd 957

Infection is unique to the cat and, as such, does not pose
any health risk to humans.

PLAGUE
Definition/overview
Plague is an uncommon infection of cats caused by the
facultative anaerobic, gram-negative bacterium Yersinia
pestis. The organism has been sustained for centuries
by chronic bacteremia in wild rodents, including rock
squirrels, ground squirrels, and prairie dogs. In the USA,
reported cases of plague have a seasonal distribution,
corresponding to the period when rodents and fleas are
most active and humans are most likely to be outdoors
(February to August). Xenopsylla cheopis fleas are considered efficient vectors, while Ctenocephalides species are
not as likely to transmit Y. pestis.
Although infections in domestic animals are uncommon, the fact that both domestic and feral cats are susceptible to Y. pestis infection, and that cats are a documented
source of human infection, means that plague must
be regarded as a significant zoonotic infection of cats.
Although dogs can become infected, their susceptibility is
considerably less than cats.

Etiology
Transmission of the bacterium to susceptible hosts occurs
predominantly through flea bites or the ingestion of
infected rodents or lagomorphs; humans, dogs, and cats
are usually accidental hosts and are not responsible for
the transmission of infection. However, infection can also
be transmitted directly through contact with broken skin
or by inhalation of infectious microdroplets from cats or
humans infected with the pneumonic form of plague.

23/04/16 1:29 pm

958

Multisystemic disorders

Pathophysiology
The incubation period depends on the route of entry of
the organism: 2–6 days with flea bites; 1–3 days after
inhalation or ingestion. Typically, there is evidence of
neutrophilic leukocytosis with a left shift and lymphopenia, and hyperglycemia, azotemia, hypokalemia,
hypoalbuminemia, hyperglobulinemia, hypochloremia,
hyperbilirubinemia, and elevated SAP and ALT.

Clinical presentation
Three clinical forms of Y. pestis infection have been recognized in cats: bubonic (most common), septicemic, and
pneumonic. Following ingestion of infected rodents, cats
that become infected typically develop fever, necrotic
stomatitis and lymphadenomegaly, particularly around
the head and neck (Figure 21.43). Lymph nodes may rupture and drain through to the skin surface. Subsequently,
septicemia may develop in a small number of cats (septicemic plague). Fever, shock, DIC, and pneumonitis are
short-lived signs that precede death. Hematogenous
spread of the organism to the lungs in cats culminates in
pneumonic plague, which is particularly likely to be fatal.
Within endemic areas (particularly the southwestern
USA and western coastal states), cats presented with persistent fever, lymph node enlargement, tonsillar enlargement, necrotic stomatitis, facial ulceration, or abdominal
distension should be evaluated for plague.

Differential diagnosis
Any cat living in, or from, a plague-endemic area should
be considered suspect if presented for stomatitis, chronic
respiratory disease, and/or lymphadenomegaly. Feline
frontal sinusitis/rhinitis, sepsis, neoplasia, toxemia,

21.43

Figure 21.43 Feline plague can cause signs of other more
familiar syndromes such as the severe frontal sinusitis shown in
this cat. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C021.indd 958

pyometra, and lymphoma are important differential
diagnoses for feline plague.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of feline plague is based on identification of the
organism collected from cultured tissue, fluid, or blood.
Smears can be made from aspirates collected from draining
lesions and enlarged lymph nodes; gram-negative bacteria
with a bipolar safety pin shape can be visualized. Cultures
from tonsils are reported to be particularly important in
confirming a diagnosis; however, recent antimicrobial
treatment might cause false-negative results. Colonies
might take 48 hours to appear; they are a significant biohazard and should be sent to recommended laboratories
obtained on the advice of local public health authorities.
Acute and convalescent antibody titers can also be used
to document infection. Since the incubation period is relatively short (1–6 days), seronegative results can occur initially in infected cats. A four-fold rise in antibody titer over
3–4 weeks is necessary to distinguish active disease from
prior exposure. Because of the zoonotic potential of feline
plague, attempts to culture the organism in a veterinary
practice are discouraged. IFA testing can be performed
on heat fixed slides of tissue aspirates or on impression
smears collected at necropsy and submitted to recommended testing facilities. Specimens should not be shipped
to routine veterinary diagnostic laboratories; local public
health authorities should be contacted regarding approved
testing laboratories and specific shipping instructions.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Because of the time delay involved in confirming a diagnosis, treatment is typically initiated prior to establishing a diagnosis. The medical management of cats
suspected of having plague includes treatment for fleas,
flushing abscesses or draining lymph nodes, and administering antimicrobial therapy for a minimum of 10 days.
It is particularly important that all cats suspected of having plague be handled by persons wearing full personal
protective equipment, including examination gloves,
gowns, and a surgical mask and goggles or a full face
mask. Extreme care should be taken when working with
cats that manifest signs of pneumonia. All suspect cases
should be isolated for at least the first 3 days of antimicrobial therapy and the number of people in contact with the
case should be reduced to the bare minimum.
Although several antimicrobials have been effective
against Y. pestis in cats, drug resistant strains are being
isolated with increasing frequency. Administration of
doxycycline (10 mg/kg IV or PO q24h 10 days; administer

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Infectious diseases

IV diluted in 100 ml of lactated Ringer’s s­ olution over 2
hours) is recommended. Parenteral treatment is recommended for at least the first 72 hours to avoid contact
with the oral cavity of infected cats. Alternatively, gentamicin (5–8 mg/kg IV, IM, or SC q24h for 10 days) can be
administered. Chloroamphenicol (25–50 mg/kg PO q12h
for 10 days; 12–30 mg/kg IV, IM, or SC q12h for 10 days)
and trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole (30 mg/kg PO q12h
for 10 days) also have efficacy against Y. pestis. Cats that
have been exposed to plague may be treated prophylactically with doxycycline (10 mg/kg IV or PO q24h for at
least 7 days). The prognosis for cats with clinical signs
associated with plague depends on treatment status. Up
to 75% of infected cats may die if untreated, but >90% cats
treated with appropriate antimicrobial therapy survive.

Prevention
Since it is impractical to control the wild rodent population within endemic areas, and a plague vaccine is not
available for use in animals at risk, effective flea control is
the best means of preventing infection. In addition, dogs
and cats should be restricted from hunting and access to
carcasses of dead rodents or rabbits.

Public health implications
The risk of human exposure to plague appears to be greatest in the western USA, particularly California, Arizona,
and New Mexico. Because human plague infection, particularly pneumonic plague, has a significant mortality
rate, veterinarians working in endemic areas should be
particularly alert to potential infections in cats. Because
feline and canine cases are now relatively rare, underrec-­
ognition could be problematic. Furthermore, there appears
to be an increased risk of exposure when maintaining
and treating nondomestic cats living in endemic areas.
Attempts should be made to limit exposure to these potential carriers.

VIRAL INFECTIONS
FELINE INFECTIOUS PERITONITIS
Definition/overview
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is a common disease in
cats caused by a virulent mutation of feline enteric coronavirus (FECV). During the process of mutation from FECV to
FIP virus (FIPV), the virus loses its tropism for enterocytes
and gains tropism for macrophages, enabling it to replicate inside a specific population of precursor monocytes/­
macrophages with an affinity for the endothelium of
venules in the serosa, omentum, pleura, meninges, and
uveal tract. At least three types of mutations in FECVs are

K22463_C021.indd 959

959

currently under study in the transition of FECV to FIPV,
two in the spike protein and one in the accessory 3c genes.
Clinical FIP is characterized by widespread immune-­
mediated vasculitis and/or pyogranulomas, manifesting
as an effusive form, with high-protein effusions in body
cavities, or a noneffusive form characterized by tissue
granulomas. While the disease course from the onset of
clinical signs until death can be variable, ranging from
weeks to months and, rarely, years, it is usually shorter in
younger cats and those with effusive disease. The mortality rate is extremely high and one study reported a 1-year
survival rate of 5%.

Etiology
Coronaviruses are large enveloped RNA viruses and are
the most common pathogen isolated from the feces of
cats. Infection with FECV is typically acquired by kittens
or young cats in multi-cat households from exposure to
chronically shedding cats via the fecal–oral and oral–oral
routes. Mutation from FECV to FIPV is thought to occur
at some point after FECV infection, between viral replication in enterocytes and replication in macrophages.
Direct transmission of FIPV between cats is thought to be
extremely rare, since FIPV is found inside macrophages.

Pathophysiology
Initially, the virus replicates in oropharyngeal tissues
and in the enterocytes at the tips of the intestinal villi.
The manifestation of infection depends on several predisposing factors, including the immunocompetence
of the host and the strain and dose of virus. A vigorous
cell-mediated immune response is required for protection from FIP, while antibodies produced in response to
infection enhance the uptake and replication of FIPVs in
macrophages and contribute to the immune-mediated
vasculitis seen in effusive cases. If the antibody-mediated
immune response predominates, effusive FIP results,
but if an intermediate cell-mediated immune response
occurs, noneffusive FIP results. The noneffusive (dry)
form of the disease is limited to relatively small numbers
of FIPV-infected macrophages in pyogranulomas in specific target organs. Experimental infections resulting in
the noneffusive form have demonstrated brief episodes
of effusive disease before the dry form predominates and
conversely, in the terminal stages of the dry form, the
immune system can be overwhelmed and the effusive
form results.

Clinical presentation
There are two predominant clinical manifestations of FIP
recognized in domestic cats: the effusive, or ‘wet’, form
characterized by a viscous, high protein-content fluid in

23/04/16 1:29 pm

960

Multisystemic disorders

21.44

21.45

21.46

Figures 21.44–21.46 Eight-month-old neutered male Siamese
cat with effusive FIP. (21.44, 21.45) Note the abdominal
distension due to the peritoneal effusion. (21.46) Note the
scrotal effusion.

the abdominal or, less often, the pleural cavity; and the
noneffusive, ‘dry’, form characterized by pyogranulomatous lesions seen predominantly in the abdominal cavity,
but also occurring in the thorax, eyes, or CNS. Although
infections are most common amongst cats 2 years of age
and younger, cats of any age are susceptible.
The effusive form of FIP is readily diagnosed by
examination of fluid recovered from any body cavity
(Figures 21.44–21.46). The highly viscous effusion is
classified as an inflammatory exudate; it contains a high
protein content (>35 g/l [3.5 g/dl]) and has a high specific gravity (Figure 21.47). Cytologic evaluation of the
fluid usually reveals a relatively hypocellular (<5,000

K22463_C021.indd 960

nucleated cells/µl) fluid comprised of low to moderate
numbers of neutrophils and macrophages and some lymphocytes (Figure 21.48). Abdominal swelling with a fluid
wave is typically described, although fluid can accumulate in the pleural space, scrotum, and/or pericardium.
The absence of fluid accumulation, combined with the
wide spectrum of clinical signs associated with this form
of the disease, makes noneffusive FIP considerably more
difficult to diagnose than the effusive form. The most
common sites for lesions to occur are in the abdominal
cavity, particularly in the liver, mesenteric lymph nodes,
and spleen, and the CNS. Ocular signs of FIP include anterior uveitis, hyphema, hypopyon, keratic precipitates

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Infectious diseases

(Figure 21.49), retinal detachment, perivascular cuffing,
hemorrhage, and retinitis (see Figures 19.20–19.23).
A variety of neurologic signs can develop, depending on
the particular site within the CNS in which the lesions
occur. The most commonly reported CNS signs of FIP are
seizures and posterior paresis.
Interestingly, FIP is not regarded as a cause of ‘fading kitten’ syndrome (severe illness and death occurring between
birth and weaning), perhaps because of maternally derived
immune protection in young kittens. It has been shown that
isolating kittens from all other cats by the age of 5 weeks
and keeping them in small groups is an effective strategy for protecting kittens born into endemically infected
households. However, FIP remains a relatively common
cause of death due to infection among weaned kittens.

Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses for cats with the effusive form of
FIP include ascites (hepatic or cardiac origin), cholangiohepatitis, peritonitis, neoplasia, and pregnancy. Among
cats with significant accumulation of pleural fluid, neoplasia, diaphragmatic hernia, heart failure, exudative
pleuritis (pyothorax), and chylothorax are reasonable differential diagnoses that should be considered.
The noneffusive form of FIP includes an extensive
list of differential diagnoses depending on the organ
system(s) involved (e.g. neurologic/ocular signs [seizures, posterior paralysis, toxoplasmosis, neoplasia,
idiopathic encephalomyelitis/meningitis, feline spongiform encephalopathy, retinitis with or without retinal detachment, uveitis ± keratic precipitates and
hyphema]).

Diagnosis
Clinical diagnosis is based predominantly on clinical
signs and selected laboratory abnormalities. Analysis of
effusion can be used to support a clinical diagnosis of FIP:

961

21.47

Figure 21.47 Abdominocentesis in a cat with effusive FIP
reveals the characteristic viscous, high specific gravity exudate.
Note that in some cases the globulin concentration of the fluid
is sufficiently high that the sample might clot when exposed
to air.
21.48

Figure 21.48 Cytopathology of abdominal fluid from a cat
with the effusive form of FIP is characterized as a relatively
hypocellular fluid containing a mixture of neutrophils and
macrophages (pyogranulamatous effusion).
21.49

●● Viscous effusion; clot may form when fluid is exposed
to air.

●● High protein-content effusion (usually >35 g/l [3.5 g/dl).
●● Albumin:globulin ratio of effusion is usually <0.45.
●● Cytology: relatively hypocellular (<5,000 ­nucleated
cells/µl); pyogranulomatous fluid consisting of
neutrophils and macrophages and low numbers of
lymphocytes.
The Rivalta test (Figure 21.50), which involves placing
drops of effusion fluid into a tube containing weak acetic acid and watching for characteristic clots to appear,
showed promise, but positive results can occur with

K22463_C021.indd 961

Figure 21.49 Keratic precipitates in the right eye of a cat with
the noneffusive form of FIP.

23/04/16 1:29 pm

962

Multisystemic disorders

effusions collected from cases of lymphoma or bacterial
infections. Additionally, the subjective nature of the test
reduces its diagnostic accuracy.
Serologic tests are among the most commonly utilized
and frequently criticized tests undertaken to establish a
diagnosis of FIP, particularly in cats presenting without
effusion. However, it must be emphasized that currently
there is no reliable serologic test for the diagnosis of FIP
virus infection. Serologic tests available to veterinarians
are limited to the detection of coronavirus antibody only
and do not distinguish between antibodies against FIPV
and those against FECV. However, the magnitude of the
antibody titer can be of some use clinically, in that healthy
cats exposed to FECV are likely to have titers of 1:100–
1:400, a titer of 1:1600 is suspicious for FIPV, and a titer of
at least 1:3,200 is highly suggestive of FIP. False-negative
antibody titer results can occur in the ­terminal stages of
21.50

Figure 21.50 Positive Rivalta’s
test from a cat with effusive
FIP showing clotted droplet
of effusion in weak acetic acid
(arrow).

FIP because of antigen–antibody binding. Antibody titers
are also linked to the likelihood of fecal shedding of FECV,
with titers of 1:100 or less denoting a low likelihood of
fecal shedding, while cats with titers of at least 1:400 are
usually shedding FECV in the feces.
A number of direct detection methods using PCR to
detect FIP virus, rather than FECV, in blood, effusions,
and feces have been developed over the last 20 years,
but problems with diagnostic sensitivity and specificity
have inevitably emerged after more widespread clinical
use. More recently, a PCR test designed to differentiate
between FECV and FIPV, based on detection of the spike
protein, has become commercially available. Test results
from 186 cats that were either healthy or had FIP confirmed on biopsy, produced a calculated sensitivity of
98.7% and a specificity of 100%. The preferred specimens
are pleural or abdominal effusions, but PCR can also be
performed on tissue aspirates, or fresh tissues. Whole
blood in EDTA is not recommended, as often the level of
viremia is too low to permit biotyping.
The only reference standard method for diagnosing
FIP antemortem is immunohistochemistry on biopsy
specimens. While this test is highly specific, it cannot
be used to rule out a diagnosis of FIP and its accuracy is
dependent on specimen selection and the expertise of
the microscopist reading the slides. Additionally, cases
suspect for FIP often have clinical signs and laboratory
abnormalities that do not make them good surgical candidates. A stressful event, such as anesthesia and surgery, has been known to result in clinical progression of
disease.

21.51

Negative control

a

b

Figures 21.51a, b (a) Direct immunofluorescence staining of feline abdominal effusion – positive control specimen (arrow).
(b) Direct immunofluorescence staining of feline abdominal effusion – negative control specimen (arrow).

K22463_C021.indd 962

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Infectious diseases

963

Direct
immunofluorescence
staining
detects
intracellular FIPV in macrophages in effusions from
­
cats with FIP and is widely used in Europe and Australia
(Figures 21.51a, b). This was once thought to be a confirmatory test, but a recent publication reported its specificity to be 71.4%, relegating it to the ranks of contributory
evidence rather than a reference standard test.
Routine hematology often shows mild, chronic nonregenerative anemia; leukocytosis with absolute neutrophilia and lymphopenia is frequently reported. Elevated
serum bilirubin and bilirubinuria are also common in
cats with FIP and up to 70–75% have elevated serum
protein. Assessment of albumin and globulin typically
reveals a slight decrease in the albumin fraction and a
significant, sometimes dramatic, increase in the globulin

fraction. When FIP disease prevalence is low, a high A:G
ratio can rule out FIP, but a low A:G ratio does not confirm
a diagnosis of FIP.
Characteristically, a polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia can be documented in cats with hyperproteinemia.
Serum protein electrophoresis provides a graphic portrayal of the serum proteins; however, this test does not
provide definitive diagnostic information, since other
chronic infections (e.g. FeLV and FIV) may also produce
similar findings on electrophoresis (Figure 21.52).
A diagnosis of FIP can be confirmed with histopathology, which identifies pyogranuloma formation and/
or vasculitis, and/or immunohistochemistry to identify
FIPV (Figure 21.53, 21.54a, b). This usually takes place at
necropsy.

21.52

21.53

9

9

8

8

7
6
5
4

T.P. 9.9
Alb 2.0
Glob 7.9
α1 0.2
α2 0.5
β1 0.4
β2 0.6
γ
6.2

7
6
5
4

3

3

2

2

1

1
Cattery (FIP)

Figure 21.52 Serum protein electrophoresis (densitometer
tracing) from a cat with hyperglobulinemia and
hypoalbuminemia associated with noneffusive FIP.

Figure 21.53 Splenic pyogranulomas in a cat with
noneffusive FIP.

21.54

a

b

Figures 21.54a, b (21.54a) Necropsy from the cat with effusive FIP shown in Figures 21.44–21.46. (21.54b) Note the glistening
proteinaceous fluid and subcapsular pyogranulomas on the renal surface.

K22463_C021.indd 963

23/04/16 1:29 pm

964

Multisystemic disorders

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Despite efforts to assess the value of various a
­ ntiviral,
anti-inflammatory, immunosuppressant, and immunostimulant drugs, there is still no definitive treatment for
cats with clinical FIP. Although some cats may survive for
several months or years with supportive treatment, antiviral therapy is not available. Cats with effusive disease
usually live days to weeks after diagnosis. The long-term
prognosis for cats with FIP is grave. A variety of anti-­
inflammatory and immunosuppressive treatments have
been recommended (e.g. prednisolone, 2–4 mg/kg PO
q24h, with gradually reducing doses every 10–14 days, as
needed, to control signs). However, no treatment is known
to extend the life of an infected cat.

Prevention
Although a modified live FIP vaccine is commercially
available, husbandry and management of kittens in
multi-cat households are significantly more important in
the prevention of FIP among susceptible cats. Kittens that
derive maternal antibodies from coronavirus-­shedding
queens should be protected until they are 5–6 weeks of
age. When possible, early weaning by 5 weeks of age and
permanent separation of kittens from the queen and
other potentially FECV-shedding cats are particularly
valuable management tools in minimizing coronavirus
transmission from queens to kittens.
Although most authors agree that the modified live FIP
virus vaccine is safe to administer to cats, the efficacy of
the vaccine has been challenged. Furthermore, the manufacturer’s recommendation to administer the first dose of
vaccine (intranasally) at 16 weeks of age may be too late
to protect susceptible kittens from infected queens.

Public health implications
FIP poses no known public health risk.

FELINE LEUKEMIA VIRUS
Definition/overview
FeLV is a single-stranded RNA virus (oncornavirus)
belonging to the retrovirus group. FeLV is a highly fatal,
oncogenic (tumor-producing) virus that replicates within
numerous tissues in cats, including bone marrow, salivary glands, and respiratory epithelium.

Etiology
The virus is spread both vertically (to offspring in utero
or to neonates through milk) and horizontally (from cat
to cat). Subtypes A, B, C, and T exist; the FeLV-A subtype

K22463_C021.indd 964

is ubiquitous and present in all infections. The virus has
worldwide significance and is among the most important
infectious diseases affecting cats.

Pathophysiology
The biology of FeLV infection in cats is highly complex.
After infection, usually by the oronasal route after constant exposure to chronically shedding cats, the virus
travels via the lymphocytes to the bone marrow. Viral
RNA integrates into the host cells to replicate, producing
proviral DNA that can be detected by PCR testing. Viremia
ensues and the virus infects the salivary glands and GI
epithelium; viral shedding is via saliva and feces. In a
household endemically infected with FeLV, in which no
control measures are instituted, there are four possible
outcomes of infection:

●● Abortive infection. These cats were formerly called
‘regressor cats’. They mount an effective humoral and
cell-mediated immune response on exposure to low
doses of FeLV. They do not test antigen positive on
p27 ELISA tests or on provirus PCR blood tests at any
stage.
●● Regressive infection. These cats were formerly classified as ‘transiently viremic followed by latent infection’. After infection, FeLV reaches the bone marrow
and viral integration occurs; the cat temporarily
tests p27 ELISA positive; the cat’s blood is provirus
PCR positive and viral shedding occurs, mainly in
the saliva. An immune response ensues and within
3-16 weeks of initial infection, the cat tests p27 ELISA
negative. FeLV-positive status persists on proviral
PCR blood testing, but viral load is low. Since active
viral replication is needed for the clinical effects of
FeLV to develop, the risk of clinical disease is relatively low. However, there is a potential risk of reactivation, especially in the first year of infection.
●● Progressive infection. These cats are persistently
viremic (antigen positive on p27 ELISA tests and high
viral loads are detected on provirus PCR blood tests).
●● Focal or atypical infection. This is rare in naturally
infected cats and is characterized by anatomically
localized viral replication (e.g. in the bladder, eyes,
mammary glands) that can result in intermittent
antigenemia, with accompanying positive p27 ELISA
test results. Weak positive, discordant, or fluctuating
positive/negative p27 ELISA results can occur.
In progressive or reactivated infection, integration
can culminate in malignant transformation, especially hemopoietic neoplasia (lymphoma or leukemia).

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Infectious diseases

Myeloproliferative disorders can also occur, but these are
rare and are not always FeLV associated. However, the
most common outcome of infection is profound immune
deficiency. Nonregenerative anemia, opportunistic infections, and malignancy represent the predominant causes
of death among infected cats.
Susceptibility to FeLV infection is greatest in kittens
under 4 months of age and vertical transmission is relatively common. Transmission of infection usually occurs
through ‘friendly’ contact, such as mutual grooming, but
can also occur through bites. Regressively infected queens
do not usually transmit the virus to their kittens in utero,
but individual kittens from a litter can become infected
after they are born. Embryonic deaths and stillbirths are
common among progressively infected viremic queens,
and if live kittens are born, they can become viremic and
die while they are still neonates. Older cats can have significant natural resistance to infection, probably associated with maturation of the immune response in older
cats. Additionally, FeLV infection can be sustained for
months to years before culminating in physical deterioration and death. The ability of persistently infected cats
to shed virus in high concentrations in saliva results in
rapid and effective transmission of virus via grooming
and oronasal contact to susceptible kittens, particularly
in cluster households. There is no sex or breed predilection to FeLV infection.

Clinical presentation
The clinical signs of FeLV infection are highly variable and
potentially involve any organ system. FeLV-infected cats
are at risk of developing solid tumors (e.g. lymphoma) or
leukemia. In addition, bone marrow suppression involving white cells, leukocytes, and erythrocytes is commonly
encountered in clinical practice. Compromise of cellmediated immunity culminates in increased susceptibility to bacterial, viral, and/or fungal infections. Immune
complex disease affecting renal function and causing
polyarthritis has also been documented, as have a number of reproductive and CNS disorders.

Differential diagnosis
Cats presenting with any chronic, debilitating illness,
fever, or weight loss should be tested for FeLV, regardless
of age. Chronic upper respiratory infection, stomatitis,
gingivitis, and periodontitis are common respiratory/oral
signs that justify antigen testing. Since FeLV has oncogenic
potential, cats with neoplasia, especially lymphoid tumors,
should be tested for FeLV. Hematologic abnormalities such
as nonregenerative anemia, lymphoblastic leukemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, or thrombocytosis (>1 million
platelets/mm3) can be associated with FeLV infection.

K22463_C021.indd 965

965

Diagnosis
Because of the nonspecific nature of clinical signs
­associated with FeLV infection, it is essential that FeLV
testing is performed on sick cats presented for evaluation.
The most commonly used point-of-care tests detect FeLV
p27 antigen in the blood of infected cats and are highly
sensitive and specific. However, it should be remembered
that disease prevalence affects the positive and negative
predictive value of any diagnostic test, so false-positive
results are more likely in low prevalence areas and cats
with low risk of infection. IFA testing detects FeLV in
leukocytes and is a highly specific test. However, false-­
negative results can occur if there is leukopenia or if only
a few peripheral leukocytes are infected; IFA-positive
cats are usually progressively infected. If initial testing
with point-of-care screening tests is inconclusive for
any reason, testing should be repeated, preferably by a
veterinary diagnostic laboratory, using IFA and/or PCR
for FeLV provirus. There is no commercial test routinely
available for FeLV antibody testing.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Specific treatment modalities for FeLV-infected cats are
directed at the clinical manifestation of illness. Several
immunomodulatory and antiretroviral treatments have
been attempted (Table 21.10). Results of treatment are
highly variable and have not yet been subjected to controlled studies. As in FIV-infected cats, azidothymidine
(AZT), phosphonylmethoxy­ethyladenine (PMEA), and
human recombinant alpha-interferon have been used in
an attempt to treat FeLV-infected cats. The dosage regimens recommended for these products are outlined in
Table 21.10. Lymphoma is the most common solid tumor
associated with FeLV infection. Several chemotherapeutic
combinations have been recommended to manage tumors.
Administration of corticosteroids is minimally effective
as a single agent treatment modality for FeLV-induced
cancer. CHOP (cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin
[doxorubicin], Oncovin [vincristine], and prednisone) and
CHOP-based protocols are widely used in cats diagnosed
with lymphoma. In most cases, only cats that achieve
complete remission after induction chemotherapy go
on to have long-term disease-free status. In cats with
mediastinal or multicentric lymphoma, complete remission rates of up to 90% and 1-year survival rates of up
to approximately 55% have been reported. Those with
aggressive GI lymphoma do not fare as well; about onethird to two-thirds of cats will achieve a complete remission, and 1-year survival is approximately 20–40%. FeLV
and FIV status does not affect initial response to therapy,
but positive retroviral status negatively affects long-term

23/04/16 1:29 pm

966

Multisystemic disorders

Table 21.10 Treatment protocols in the management of clinical signs in feline FeLV and/or FIV infections.
Immunomodulation therapy
•• Staphylococcal protein A (SPA, Kabi Pharmacia, Inc) (10 µg/kg IP twice weekly). Continue as needed. The drug has been used in
cats for periods of up to 8 weeks. No improvement in humoral immunity has been documented
•• Acemannan (Carrisyn, Carrington Laboratories) (2 mg/kg IP once weekly for 6 weeks). No improvement in clinical outcome or
CD4/CD8 ratios was documented following 8 weeks of treatment
•• Propionibacterium acnes (Immunoregulin, ImmunoVet) (0.5 ml per cat IV once or twice weekly as needed). Clinical i­mprovement
has been anectodally reported
•• Human recombinant interferon-alpha (rHuIFN) (Roferon-A, Hoffmann LaRoche). (The availability of this drug varies.) Various
dosing regimens are described:
○○ High dose: 1,000–10,000 U/kg IM q24h for 3–7 weeks. Treatment beyond this period is associated with anti-interferon
antibody
○○ Low dose: 30 U PO q24h for life
Antiviral therapy
•• Azidothymidine (formerly called AZT; now, Retrovir, GlaxoSmithKline) (5 mg/kg PO q8h for periods of up to 4–6 weeks
­depending on degree of bone marrow toxicity [anemia]). Alternatively, administered at 15 mg/kg PO q12h
•• 9-(2-Phosphonylmethoxyethyl) adenine (PMEA) (2.5 mg/kg SC q12h [duration not stipulated]). Availability is limited
FeLV-associated lymphoma/lymphosarcoma
Single-agent glucocorticoids are minimally effective and, therefore, are reserved for palliative management. Combination drug
therapy is recommended:
•• Induction (weeks 1–4):
2
○○ Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan, Bristol-Myers) (300 mg/m PO given once on weeks 1 and 4 only);
2
○○ plus vincristine (Oncovin, Eli Lily) (0.75 mg/m IV given once weekly on weeks 1, 2, 3, and 4);
○○ plus prednisone (2 mg/kg PO q24h for 4 weeks)
•• Maintenance (beyond 4 weeks):
○○ Discontinue the cyclophosphamide and vincristine
○○ Continue the prednisone daily as outlined above. Once the cat is determined to be in remission, the drug dose is gradually
reduced over 3 weeks then stopped
2
○○ Beginning with week 7, administer doxorubicin (25 mg/m IV once every 3 weeks) until it is determined the cat is in
remission
Cytopenia
•• Human recombinant erythropoietin (100 IU/kg SC q48h for 2 weeks or until the desired hematocrit is reached)
­Anti-erythropoietin antibody may develop against exogenous and endogenous erythropoietin
•• Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) (5 µg/kg SC q12h 1–2 weeks)
Stomatitis
•• Metronidazole (5 mg/kg PO q8h 2–4 weeks as needed)
•• Clindamycin (12.5 mg/kg PO q8h 2–4 weeks)
•• Prednisone (5 mg per cat PO q12h 2–4 weeks)
•• Bovine lactoferrin (available from chemical suppliers only) (40 mg/kg applied directly to the oral mucosa, q24h as needed)

survival, mostly because of the occurrence of other FeLVand FIV-related disorders.
Cats with myelosuppressive disease have a particularly
poor prognosis and are best managed with administration
of whole blood as needed to resolve the anemia. However,
the value of this treatment is limited by the expense and
the consequences of administering multiple blood transfusions. Recombinant human erythropoietin (rHuEPO)
(100 U/kg SC q48h) can also be used in cats with clinical
signs associated with anemia (hematocrit usually <0.2 l/l
[20%]). At least 3–4 weeks of treatment may be required
before a response is observed. It is estimated that between

K22463_C021.indd 966

20% and 30% of cats treated with rHuEPO develop anti-­
erythropoietin antibodies 6–12 months into therapy. Cats
that initially respond but then fail to respond to rHuEPO
may be transiently discontinued and restarted on the
drug 1–2 months later. The target of rHuEPO therapy is a
hematocrit of 0.3 l/l (30%) or greater. Recombinant omega
interferon of feline origin has also been used to treat FeLVrelated disease (1 million units/kg SC q24h for 5 days; three
separate 5-day treatments performed at day 0, day 14, and
day 60), although it is not available in the USA.
In cats that develop persistent FeLV-related neutropenia, recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Infectious diseases

factor (filgrastim), may be indicated (5 µg/kg SC q24h
until neutrophil count exceeds 3.0 x 103/μl for 2 days). Cost
and the development of antibodies might limit the use of
this agent.
Healthy FeLV-infected cats should be housed indoors
and kept away from other cats to limit the risk of disease
transmission; veterinary checks should be performed at
least 6-monthly. The prognosis for infected cats is highly
variable, depending on the specific disease manifested
during the course of infection and the availability of
supportive treatment for secondary infections. Although
a small percentage of FeLV-positive cats may remain
healthy for several years, the prognosis for persistently
FeLV-positive cats is poor. Most persistently infected
cats living within cluster households are expected to die
within 3 years from the time of diagnosis. Persistently
infected single household cats afforded supportive medical care could potentially have longer survival times.

Prevention
Currently, several vaccine types are on the market that
offer relatively good protection against FeLV. Killed
whole virus (adjuvanted), killed sub-unit (adjuvanted),
and recombinant (adjuvant-free) vaccines are available
(Tables 21.8 and 21.9). Routine testing, as well as vaccination of cats determined to be at risk, are key factors in
FeLV prevention. Vaccine-associated sarcoma (VAS) in cats
has been associated with vaccination against FeLV and
also a wide variety of other vaccines and injections; conflicting accounts of differential risk by vaccine type have
been reported. Extensive studies have shown that VAS in
cats is not the result of vaccine virus reverting to a virulent state and causing tumor. A familial predisposition
among certain families of cats to develop tumors has also
been suggested. Kittens are clearly the most susceptible
to FeLV infection following exposure, while adult indoor
cats are among the least susceptible to infection. As with
any vaccination decision, risk assessment for infection
should be made on an individual basis, based on lifestyle factors and local prevalence. None of the currently
available FeLV vaccines will cause false-positive tests for
FeLV antigen on either IFA or ELISA tests. However, FeLV
testing should be performed before FeLV vaccination to
establish FeLV infection status. Routine vaccination with
core (nonFeLV) vaccines should not be avoided in FeLVinfected cats, although inactivated (killed) vaccines are
recommended.

Public health implications
FeLV has been the subject of extensive studies pertaining to its zoonotic potential. Although there are studies available to suggest that human infection with FeLV

K22463_C021.indd 967

967

might be possible, no human has ever been known to
become infected with FeLV nor has human leukemia ever
been traced to FeLV antigen. Currently, FeLV in cats is not
regarded as a human health hazard.

FELINE IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS
Definition/overview
First described in 1987, FIV is an RNA retrovirus (lentivirus) infection unique to cats. The major risk factors for
infection are male gender, intact status, free roaming/
outdoor access, and clinical signs of ill health.

Etiology
Transmission among cats occurs primarily through bite
wounds. Transfusion of blood from an infected cat is also
a highly effective means of transmitting the disease.
Vertical transmission of FIV has been reported, but is
much less likely in naturally infected cats than in experimental infections.

Pathophysiology
FIV is a lentivirus and, therefore, shares many properties
with other retroviruses such as HIV. Because of this, FIV
infection in cats has been used extensively in the study
of HIV infection. Many cats are subclinically infected, but
clinical FIV infection is characterized by chronic, variable
illness, immunosuppression, decreased CD4+ lymphocytes (T-helper lymphocytes), and a reduced CD4+:CD8+
(cytotoxic lymphocytes) lymphocyte ratio.

Clinical presentation
Cats infected with FIV manifest a wide variety of
­nonspecific clinical signs. Dermatitis, stomatitis, ocular
disease, renal insufficiency, lower urinary tract infections, neurologic abnormalities, and opportunistic infections have been reported in infected cats (Figures 21.55,
21.56). FIV infection is significantly ­associated with the
development of lymphoma. However, many cats with FIV
infection manifest no clinical signs for weeks to years
following infection and can eventually die of unrelated
causes. In addition, laboratory findings in cats with FIV
infection are equally nonspecific and contribute little to
establishing a diagnosis of FIV i­ nfection. Mild, nonregenerative anemia, neutropenia, lymphopenia, and hyper­
gammaglobulinemia characterized on biochemistry
profile as hyperproteinemia are commonly found on routine hematology and serum biochemistry.

Differential diagnosis
Any adult cat presented for chronic or debilitating
illness, fever, or weight loss should routinely be

23/04/16 1:29 pm

968

Multisystemic disorders

21.55

Diagnosis
Detection of FIV-specific antibodies in blood or serum is
the most widely accepted means of establishing a diagnosis. Point-of-care tests are highly specific and sensitive
for the detection of anti-FIV antibodies. The presence of
antibodies in blood or serum denotes exposure as well as
infection. Interpretation of a positive antibody test in kittens under 6 months of age is complicated by the fact that
maternal antibody from an infected queen may be transferred via the colostrum to kittens. FIV antibody-positive
kittens must be retested after 6 months of age. FIV PCR
testing to detect FIV antigenemia is commercially available, and a positive result is regarded as confirmation of
positive FIV status. However, negative FIV PCR results do
not necessarily mean that the cat is not infected, as the
primers used in the test might not detect all field strains.
Cats vaccinated against FIV, using the commercially available inactivated (killed) vaccine, also remain ELISA positive for years after vaccination. PCR testing does not
detect vaccine virus and cats that test positive on initial
­point-­of-care screening tests and are also PCR positive
are regarded as infected, even if there is a history of
vaccination, as infection can occur while the cat is fully
vaccinated.

Figure 21.55 Chronic inflammatory skin disease is sometimes
diagnosed in cats infected with FIV.

21.56

Figure 21.56 Chronic stomatitis in a cat.

tested for FIV as well as FeLV. Cats with anemia, neutropenia, stomatitis, glossitis, lymphoma, or chronic
upper respiratory infection should be evaluated
for FIV infection. FIP is an important differential
diagnosis among FIV-infected cats with significant
hypergammaglobulinemia.

K22463_C021.indd 968

Management
Treatment/prognosis
There is currently no FIV-specific antiviral therapy available. The use of nucleoside analogs such as AZT and PMEA
has produced some short-term clinical improvement and
increased CD4+:CD8+ ratio in a small number of published
studies, but significant side-effects, particularly anemia,
can occur subsequent to the use of either of these drugs.
Human recombinant ­alpha-interferon has also been used
to treat immunodeficient cats subsequent to retrovirus
infection. Treatment is inexpensive and clinical improvements have been reported over the first 2 months of treatment. While the life span of treated cats exceeded that of
placebo-treated cats, there was no change in CD4+:CD8+
ratio or other hematologic p
­ arameters. Additionally, none
of the treatments listed in Table 21.10 will convert an
FIV-positive status to a ­negative status.
FIV-positive cats can be susceptible to a number
of chronic inflammatory and secondary infections.
Supportive treatment is indicated and may, in those
cats that respond to treatment, extend the life of the
clinically infected cat for several months or years. There
is no published evidence of increased rates of adverse
effects after administration of modified live virus vaccines in FIV-positive cats. Most authors agree that routine vaccination is indicated, assuming ­significant risk
of exposure exists.

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Infectious diseases

Prevention
The most effective means of preventing FIV infection is
to limit exposure to, and agonistic encounters with, FIVinfected cats that could result in biting. A number of
published studies have demonstrated that casual contact between harmoniously cohabiting FIV-positive and
FIV-negative cats over years has not resulted in viral
transmission, despite mutual grooming, minor episodes
of aggression, and sharing food and water dishes, litter pans, and bedding. However, careful management is
required when cats are first introduced to one another, as
the potential for agonistic interactions that could result
in FIV transmission is increased. Because of this, it is
important to determine FIV status before cats are introduced to one another and then to observe interactions
until the likelihood of aggression resulting in penetrating bite wounds is remote. If there is a reasonable suspicion that such agonistic interactions will occur when the
cats are unobserved, FIV-positive and FIV-negative cats
should be segregated from one another.
There is currently only one FIV vaccine licensed for
use in cats (Table 21.8). Availability of the vaccine is limited to countries where the manufacturer has received
approval. The vaccine is dual-clade (FIV sub-groups A
and D viruses are present in the product). The efficacy
of vaccination against FIV is the subject of some debate.
Post-vaccination FIV-positive ELISA status can persist for
many years and places vaccinated cats under some risk of
potential misclassification as FIV infected. It is also possible for vaccinated cats to subsequently become infected,
severely confounding the interpretation of FIV diagnostic
testing. If vaccination is deemed necessary, veterinarians
are strongly encouraged to use microchip identification
in an attempt to avoid incorrect clinical choices in cats
that subsequently test FIV ELISA positive. A method of
differentiating infected from vaccinated cats, based on
CD4%:CD8(low)% T-lymphocyte ratio, has recently been
reported.

969

study indicated that only about one-third of free r­ oaming
cats had protective antibody titers when tested in a
trap–neuter–return program.

Etiology
Like CPV infection, FPV infection is transmitted by contact
with the feces, saliva, and/or secretions of infected cats,
or by fomite transmission. Droplet infection can occur via
sneezing, especially if there is concurrent upper respiratory tract disease. Virus is shed in the urine and feces
for up to 6 weeks (usually 2–3 weeks) following recovery
from clinical disease. The virus is capable of persisting
in the environment, outside the host, for periods of at
least 1 year. Some unvaccinated adult cats can acquire
natural immunity subsequent to subclinical infection
via low-level viral exposure to infected cats or fomites.
Kittens are more likely to become infected (Figure 21.57),
but once clinical infection occurs, both kittens and adults
have similar mortality rates.

Pathophysiology
The virus requires rapidly multiplying cells for replication, so it has a tropism for those tissues with a high
mitotic rate (e.g. bone marrow, lymphoid organs, and the
intestinal crypts). Cellular depletion and immunosuppression occur when lymphoid tissue is infected and myeloid
cell populations are depleted by bone marrow infection;
panleukopenia results. Rapidly dividing intestinal crypt
cells are also a site of infection, resulting in malabsorption, increased permeability, and hemorrhagic diarrhea.
Fetal and neonatal infection targets the CNS, including
the cerebrum, cerebellum, retinae, and optic nerves. Fetal
death, fetal absorption, abortion, or mummified fetuses

21.57

Public health implications
FIV poses no known health risk to humans.

FELINE PANLEUKOPENIA (FELINE
PARVOVIRUS)
Definition/overview
Feline panleukopenia (FPL) is caused by a small,
single-stranded DNA parvovirus recognized in cats worldwide. Once a common fatal viral infection, feline panleukopenia virus (FPV) infection is a rare disease among
vaccinated pet cats. However, FPV infection regularly
occurs in cats housed in animal shelters. One published

K22463_C021.indd 969

Figure 21.57 This young Siamese kitten had marked vomiting,
diarrhea, and fever caused by feline panleukopenia virus. It was
an unvaccinated cat that was hospitalized for a fracture repair.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

23/04/16 1:29 pm

970

Multisystemic disorders

can occur in infected pregnant queens. Blindness and
cerebellar hypoplasia (Figure 21.58), manifesting as non-­
progressive hypermetria and ataxia, are common among
kittens infected as neonates.

Clinical presentation
Following FPV exposure, clinical disease is more likely to
develop in unvaccinated kittens under 5 months of age,
as they are less likely to have protective antibody titers.
It should be remembered that vaccinated kittens can be
infected, as maternally derived antibodies can interfere
with the response to vaccination. Kittens suckling queens
with high antibody titers are likely to receive large
amounts of anti-FPV antibodies, prolonging interference
with the immune response to vaccination, sometimes
until 16–20 weeks of age. When clinical disease does
develop, the onset is acute and may culminate in death
within 12 hours, sometimes without apparent clinical
signs of disease. FPV infection, therefore, is frequently
included in the differential diagnosis list for fading kitten
syndrome. Infected cats generally present with clinical
signs including fever, lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, and/or dehydration. Death can result from shock,
DIC, secondary bacterial infections, and/or profound
dehydration. One retrospective study reported that clinical recovery most often occurred approximately 5 days
after the onset of clinical signs (range 1–9 days), while in
fatal cases, death occurred approximately 1 day after the
onset of clinical signs (range 0–9 days). Cerebellar hypoplasia is a clinical finding among kittens born to queens
infected during pregnancy. Affected kittens ambulate
with a characteristic broad-based stance and manifest
hypermetric movements. Intention tremors of the head
may occur when food is offered to affected kittens. One or
more of a litter of kittens may be affected. The condition
21.58

is not progressive, so affected cats can make good pets if
their clinical signs allow good quality of life.
One study reported that low leukocyte counts (<1 x 103
leukocytes/µl), hypoproteinemia (less than 30 g/l
[3 g/dl]) and hypokalemia (<4 mmol/l) were poor prognostic indicators in FPV-infected cats.

Differential diagnosis
Intestinal parasitism, including coccidiosis, infectious
enteritis, intussusception, and poisoning, are consistent
with acute, enteric FPV infection, particularly in young cats.
Salmonella infections can cause hemorrhagic diarrhea and
panleukopenia. Sepsis and enteric foreign body may also
be considered. Neurologic signs associated with cerebellar
hypoplasia may be consistent with acute head trauma.

Diagnosis
Infected cats usually have a history of possible exposure
to FPV and risk factors for infection, such as lack of a
vaccination history and/or age less than 16 weeks. The
­point-of-care canine ELISA fecal antigen test has been
validated for use in cats and a positive test result is considered confirmation of infection. However, a negative
test result does not rule out infection, since viral shedding is intermittent. False-positive results can occur 1–14
days after vaccination, although these are rare. The hallmark laboratory finding in kittens with FPV infection is
a leukocyte count between 50 and 3,000 cells/µl, and this
can be determined in practice with microscopic examination of a simple blood smear. Thrombocytopenia is occasionally reported. Biochemical profiles are of little value
in establishing a diagnosis of FPV infection. Although
serologic testing and virus isolation are effective means
of diagnosing the disease, these procedures are not routinely available in clinical practice. A full necropsy should
be performed on any cat suspected to have succumbed
to FPV infection. The most important tissue to submit
for histopathology is the intestinal tract. Neonatally
infected cats may have cerebellar hypoplasia or retinal
degeneration.
Point-of-care FPV antibody tests are commercially
available to determine protection status during outbreaks, but they have relatively low levels of sensitivity
and specificity, making them unreliable for use in clinical
or shelter practice.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Figure 21.58 Brain from a normal kitten (right) compared with
the brain of a kitten with cerebellar hypoplasia associated with
feline panleukopenia virus infection.

K22463_C021.indd 970

There is no specific antiviral therapy available for the
treatment of FPV-infected cats. While feline recombinant
interferon-ω has been used successfully to treat CPV, one
feline study using the agent as a preventive measure before

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Infectious diseases

an FPV outbreak was unable to demonstrate improved
outcomes in treated kittens. Intensive supportive therapy and nursing care offer the only reasonable means of
treating clinically affected cats. A single dose of serum
from an immune cat can be administered through a filter
either IV or intraperitoneally, to cross-matched, exposed,
unvaccinated kittens (2 ml in kittens <12 weeks; 4 ml in
kittens >12 weeks). Only one dose can be administered, to
prevent subsequent anaphylaxis, and vaccination against
FPV should be delayed in treated kittens by 3–4 weeks to
prevent antibody interference with the immune response.
Once recommenced, the course of vaccination should continue 2–4 weeks longer than usual (up to 18–24 weeks old).
Parenterally administered balanced electrolyte solutions, such as lactated Ringer’s solution, are of utmost
importance in replacement of electrolytes and fluids;
hetastarch or plasma could be considered in hypoproteinemic cats. Antimicrobial therapy is indicated, since
secondary bacterial infections and sepsis are common
complications resulting from viral injury to the intestinal mucosa. As with antiemetic and fluid therapy,
all antimicrobials should be administered parenterally. Parenteral ampicillin sodium/sulbactam sodium
(50 mg/kg [­combined] IV q8h) is a good empiric choice.
Parenterally administered maropitant citrate (1 mg/kg
IV or SC q24h) is an effective antiemetic. Appetite stimulants, such as mirtazapine (3–4 mg per cat PO q72h) or
cyproheptadine (2–4 mg/cat q12–24h) can be used during
the recovery phase.

Prevention
Several excellent vaccines are available for immunization
of kittens against FPV (Table 21.8). Although maternal
antibody interferes with vaccination, most cats can be
effectively immunized by 16–20 weeks of age. Cats that do
recover from natural infection probably derive lifelong
immunity. Recent resurgence of FPV in shelter-housed
cats in the USA has prompted a change in initial vaccine
recommendations for owned pet cats to commence at 6
weeks of age, with boosters every 3–4 weeks until 16–20
weeks of age, followed by a booster 1 year following the
last vaccine in the initial series. Shelter-housed kittens
should be vaccinated using modified live vaccine from 4
weeks of age, every 2–3 weeks, until 16–20 weeks old.
Both modified live virus (MLV) and killed (adjuvanted)
virus vaccines are available. Vaccines are administered by
the subcutaneous route. At least one manufacturer in the
USA does market an intranasal (combined with FHV-1 and
FCV) vaccine but this may not be as effective for the prevention of FPV infection as subcutaneous MLV. Although
MLV vaccines are used predominantly in clinical practice
and in shelters, they should not be administered to kittens

K22463_C021.indd 971

971

<4 weeks of age or pregnant queens, as vaccine virus may
replicate in the cerebellum of unborn kittens and kittens
<6 weeks old and may cause neurologic signs after birth.
FPV is long lived in the environment and quaternary
ammonium disinfectants are not usually effective. Bleach
(1:32 solution, used within 24 hours of dilution and
­protected from light) or accelerated hydrogen peroxideor potassium peroxymonosulfate-based disinfectants
should be used with a contact time of at least 10 minutes,
after thorough cleaning to remove all organic material.

Public health implications
FPV poses no risk to human health.

FELINE RABIES
(See also Chapter 14: Disorders of the nervous system and
muscle.)

Definition/overview
Feline rabies virus infection, although similar to that
described in the dog, has worldwide importance, particularly in the USA, where the incidence of feline rabies has
been greater than that in the dog since the mid-1980s.
This is considered to be associated with cats’ nocturnal
behavior and encounters with wildlife vectors and probable lower rabies vaccination rates. It is also known that
younger cats, as well as dogs, are more susceptible to rabies
virus infection than adult animals. The high concentration of rabies virus in the saliva of infected cats poses a
particular threat to humans because of their popularity
as companion animal pets and their ability to penetrate
skin with their teeth. It has been estimated that <20%
of domestic cats in the USA are ever vaccinated against
rabies. This fact, combined with the increasing incidence
of wildlife rabies in the mid-Atlantic and northeastern
USA, justifies efforts to promote feline rabies vaccination.

Etiology
Rabies is caused by an RNA virus of the Rhabdoviridae
family. In areas with good pet vaccination programs,
wildlife tend to be the major reservoirs and vectors,
whereas in areas with poor programs, domesticated animals are the major reservoirs and vectors.

Pathophysiology
After inoculation into the subcutaneous tissues and muscle, the virus replicates in muscle cells at the bite site for
weeks to months before attaching to peripheral nerve
endings and undergoing retrograde migration up nerve
axons to the CNS. Rabies virus replicates in the spinal
ganglia, from where it disseminates throughout the CNS

23/04/16 1:29 pm

972

Multisystemic disorders

21.59

and continues replicating. The virus is then transported
out of the CNS to other body tissues, including the salivary glands, through peripheral, motor, and sensory
nerves. An animal is infectious when the salivary glands
are affected. Infectious virus may be shed in saliva for up
to 13 days before clinical signs of illness are manifest.

Clinical presentation
The incubation period for rabies is from just over 1 week
to 6 months, and is shorter if the site of inoculation is
close to the CNS. Clinical rabies infection in cats, like dogs,
is divided into two general categories: furious and paralytic. A prodromal phase can also occur before the furious
stage, but it is often subclinical. Prodromal clinical signs,
if they occur, include vague neurologic and behavioral
changes, irritation at the site of viral inoculation, fever,
and increased agitation lasting for 1–2 days.
As the disease progresses, about two-thirds of affected
cats manifest the furious type of disease, which lasts up
to 7 days. Affected cats become particularly aggressive
towards humans as well as other animals and inanimate
objects. They are described as having an anxious appearance and will make vicious attempts to bite or scratch at
any moving object. Affected cats may run or pace continuously until they collapse. In contrast to dogs, cats with
rabies frequently manifest increased vocalization and a
change in the pitch of voice. The clinical signs of furious
rabies progress to paralytic disease in those cats that survive this long. Affected cats manifest flaccid ascending
paraparesis, which often involves the site of inoculation,
incoordination, paralysis, coma, and death.

Differential diagnosis
Kittens and cats infected with and shedding rabies may
not manifest clinical signs, at least during the early
stages of infection. (Note: Any cat with unexplainable
neurologic and/or behavioral changes should be considered suspect for rabies.) Neoplasia, spinal or head trauma,
and poisoning or toxicity are important differential
diagnoses for feline rabies. In the USA, the use of killed
and recombinant rabies vaccines in cats has eliminated
vaccine-induced signs of rabies.

Diagnosis
No specific changes are characteristic of rabies infection on hematology, serum biochemistry, or CSF analysis. Serum tests to detect anti-rabies virus antibodies in
infected animals are often negative. Direct IFA staining
or immunohistochemistry of nervous tissue collected
at necropsy is the most common and recommended
method of confirming rabies infection in both dogs and
cats (Figure 21.59). Reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR is a

K22463_C021.indd 972

Figure 21.59 Rabies causes characteristic microscopic Negri
bodies (arrows) in the brains of affected animals. (From Kassira
JP (1997) (ed.) Images in Clinical Medicine. Selections from the
New England Journal of Medicine, with permission.)

sensitive and specific test that can provide fast (within
hours) results when neural tissues and/or saliva are submitted for testing. However, attempts to make antemortem diagnoses of rabies in animals are not recommended
and a negative RT-PCR test performed on saliva cannot
be used to rule out rabies. The proper procedure for handling specimens from suspect rabies cases has been outlined earlier (see Canine rabies).

Management
Treatment/prognosis
The zoonotic threat posed by rabies virus infection in
cats justifies strict isolation and quarantine of cats suspected of or known to be infected. Treatment should not
be attempted. The prognosis for recovery from the clinical infection is grave.

Prevention
Killed (adjuvanted) virus vaccines (1-year and 3-year)
and a feline recombinant (adjuvant-free) rabies vaccine
are available for use in cats. Current standards for vaccination of cats against rabies are outlined in Tables 21.8

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Infectious diseases

and 21.9. Where feline rabies vaccine is mandated by law,
the first dose of vaccine can be given as early as 3 months
of age. A second dose, administered 1 year following the
date of the initial rabies vaccine, is required. Today, there
is considerable variation among states and countries as
to the frequency of booster vaccinations in adult cats. It is
recommended that rabies vaccinations should be administered as low as possible on the right hindlimb, so that if
a sarcoma develops subsequent to vaccination, there is a
history of the type of vaccine used at the site. Vaccination
intervals range from 1 to 3 years depending on the specific product used. While rare, there have been cases of
rabies in vaccinated animals when vaccinations have
been allowed to lapse.

Public health implications
As with dogs, any human exposed to the saliva of a cat
suspected of having rabies should be considered exposed
and immediate isolation and treatment should be instituted. Treatment of a bite wound in a person caused by
any domestic or feral cat must be treated aggressively
by washing thoroughly as soon after the injury as possible. Irrigation of the wound with large quantities of a
20% aqueous soap solution or quaternary ammonium
solution (e.g. benzalkonium chloride) is recommended.
Humans who receive unprovoked bite wounds from feral
or free-roaming cats have the highest risk of exposure. In
addition to local wound treatment, these individuals are
justifiably treated according to standard post-exposure
prophylaxis, which includes administration of human
rabies immune globulin and diploid cell vaccine. Rabies
virus is quickly inactivated outside the host and susceptible to routine disinfectants.

FELINE VIRAL UPPER RESPIRATORY INFECTION
Definition/overview
Feline viral upper respiratory infection is generally
attributable to either or both of two viruses: FHV-1 and
FCV. It is important to acknowledge that bacterial upper
respiratory tract infections with Bordetella bronchiseptica,
Chlamydia felis, Mycoplasma felis, Staphylococcus spp. and/
or Streptococcus spp. may concurrently infect cats with
FHV-1 or FCV, thereby complicating the course of clinical
disease.
FHV-1 is a double-stranded enveloped DNA virus that
is extremely labile outside the host. Capable of surviving
for only up to 18 hours in a damp environment, FHV-1
is highly susceptible to common disinfectants. FCV, on
the other hand, is a small, single-stranded unenveloped
RNA virus that can survive outside the host and is not
susceptible to some commonly used disinfectants, such as

K22463_C021.indd 973

973

quaternary ammonium compounds. While FHV-1 causes
fairly uniform clinical disease, several strains of FCV have
been identified and are known to vary in their clinical
effects, anatomic localization, virulence, and antigenicity.
Despite widespread vaccination against FHV-1 and FCV,
these viruses still occur very frequently in the domestic
cat population, particularly in multiple cat households
and animal shelters.

Etiology
Transmission from infected to susceptible cats occurs
most commonly by direct contact and through fomites;
airborne transmission is not thought to be important,
although sneezed droplets can spray over 1–2 meters. Cats
living in high-density populations are known to be particularly susceptible to infection because crowding facilitates viral transmission and immune function in stressed
cats can be suboptimal. In addition, kittens that recover
from the acute infection are likely to develop a chronic
carrier state with either FHV-1 or FCV. This chronic carrier
state usually persists for months to years (likely for life in
the case of FHV-1 carriers) and contributes significantly
to the persistence of the virus within cat populations, particularly in multi-cat environments. FHV-1 shedding by
carriers is intermittent, but can be precipitated by stress
or immunosuppressive therapy; FCV shedding is usually
constant, but can fluctuate in individuals.

Pathophysiology
After initial infection, FHV-1 is carried as a latent virus.
Intermittent periods of shedding may occur for 1–2 weeks
following a ‘stressful’ episode (e.g. boarding, general
anesthesia, corticosteroid therapy). During this time cats
may manifest mild clinical signs, but they are capable of
shedding virulent virus.
It has been reported that 50% of FCV-recovered cats
develop a carrier state and shed virus for at least 75 days
after infection. Although chronic FCV carriers may shed
virus for weeks to possibly years following the initial
infection, they shed virus continuously from conjunctival, nasal, and oral secretions and, as such, pose a significant risk to susceptible kittens and adults.

Clinical presentation
The hallmark clinical sign of acute viral upper respiratory infection is sneezing, frequently accompanied by
a serous to mucopurulent nasal and ocular discharge,
dehydration, anorexia, and varying degrees of chemosis
(Figures 21.60, 21.61). Oral ulceration can be common
among FCV-infected cats, but is relatively uncommon in
FHV-1 infections. Epiphora, keratitis, dendritic ulceration
(Figure 21.62), corneal sequestra, symblepharon, and

23/04/16 1:29 pm

974

Multisystemic disorders

profound chemosis are more likely to occur in cats with
FHV-1 than with FCV (see Figures 19.10–19.19). Acute,
recrudescent FHV-1 infection is most likely to manifest
signs consistent with traumatic keratitis (edema, neovascularization) or conjunctivitis, with or without corneal
ulceration. Chronic ocular signs associated with viral
infection can be unilateral or bilateral. Polyarthropathy
and pyrexia (febrile limping syndrome) can occur in juvenile cats infected with FCV (Figure 21.63), but has not been
reported in association with FHV-1. However, attempting
to distinguish one viral infection from another on the
basis of clinical signs is particularly difficult. Clinical
signs and history are usually sufficient to make a clinical
diagnosis of viral upper respiratory infection. Given the
treatment options available, it is not always important

21.60

to distinguish one viral infection from another, although
environmental ­disinfection requires compounds capable
of inactivating enveloped viruses in FCV outbreaks.
FHV-1 carrier cats may manifest chronic, secondary
bacterial rhinitis and sinusitis because of permanent
viral turbinate osteolysis. Clinical signs characteristically
resolve during periods of antimicrobial administration,
only to reappear following discontinuation of the drug.
FCV has also been implicated in the development of
chronic plasmacytic–lymphocytic stomatitis, faucitis, and
gingivitis.

Differential diagnosis
Ocular signs of acute viral upper respiratory infection
in kittens, such as severe conjunctivitis and chemosis,
may be consistent with C. felis infection, although the
viral infection is characteristically associated with more
severe respiratory signs. B. bronchiseptica may cause

21.62

Figures 21.60 Bilateral conjunctivitis in a kitten caused by an
upper respiratory virus. (Courtesy M. Schaer)
Figure 21.62 Keratoconjunctivitis and dendritic ulcer in an
adult cat with recrudescent feline herpesvirus infection.
21.61
21.63

Figure 21.61 Cat with unilateral conjunctivitis and
photophobia due to feline herpesvirus.

K22463_C021.indd 974

Figure 21.63 Siamese cat with a hunched posture associated
with diffuse polyarthropathy caused by feline calicivirus.
(Courtesy M. Schaer)

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Infectious diseases

opportunistic infections culminating in pneumonia and
sudden death among kittens with acute viral respiratory
disease. M. felis infection can cause acute upper respiratory and/or ocular signs, and is a cause of bacterial pneumonia in cats.

975

21.64

Diagnosis
Commercial veterinary laboratories offer PCR testing
for feline upper respiratory tract pathogens, including
FHV-1, FCV, C. felis, B. bronchiseptica, and M. felis. A sterile cotton-tipped swab with a plastic (not wooden) stem
is used to collect specimens from the conjunctival sac,
oropharynx, and/or nostrils, although fine swabs with
wire stems are required to fit inside small feline nostrils. The swab should be transported in a plain sterile
tube that does not contain transport medium. Because
of the high number of vaccinates and the frequency of
chronic carrier cats, serology has not been a valuable aid.
A highly sensitive and specific commercially available
point-­of-care ELISA test is available for the detection of
protective antibody titers against FHV-1 and FCV, but
since strong c­ ell-mediated immunity is also required for
protection from infection, protective antibody titers can
only prevent severe clinical signs. Conversely, a cat with
negative antibody titers against FHV-1 and/or FCV is not
necessarily susceptible to infection, since test results only
reflect the humoral arm of the immune response.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
The focus of treatment for cats with viral upper respiratory infection, whether it be FHV-1 or FCV, centers around
the ability to provide good nursing care, calories, fluid
and electrolyte replacement, and antimicrobial therapy
to combat secondary bacterial infection. Doxycycline is a
good empiric choice, as it is also effective against C. felis,
B. bronchiseptica, and M. felis. Dehydration results from
reduced food and fluid intake and losses via secretions,
which can be copious. In severe cases, dyspnea can occur.
Placement of a nasoesophageal feeding tube facilitates
the administration of fluids and calories to affected cats
(Figure 21.64).
There is no antiviral therapy registered for use in
FHV-1- or FCV-infected cats. The popular antiherpesvirus
drug used in human herpesvirus infection, acyclovir, has
been studied in cats and shown not to be effective against
FHV-1. It can cause leukopenia and anemia, which are
reversible when therapy is discontinued. There have
been promising reports of favorable responses to treatment with famciclovir in cats naturally infected with
FHV-1, but these have mostly been anecdotal or the result
of uncontrolled studies. Dose and dose frequency are

K22463_C021.indd 975

Figure 21.64 A nasoesophageal tube being used to provide
fluids and calories to an anorexic cat with acute viral upper
respiratory tract infection.

critical with this drug and the cost of therapy at the currently recommended dose rate of 90mg/kg q12h is prohibitive in most cases. However, in cats with ulcerative
keratitis associated with FHV-1, ophthalmic trifluridine
(1% solution) can be administered topically at 4–6-hour
intervals until 1 week beyond resolution of clinical signs.
The use of oral L-lysine, which competitively inhibits the
growth-promoting effects of arginine on FHV-1, has been
controversial. However, a number of recent studies have
not supported its efficacy in infected cats, and one study
even showed that oral L-lysine led to increased severity
of disease compared with placebo-treated cats.
The prognosis for recovery from acute viral upper
respiratory infection is excellent if supportive care is provided and the cat housed to avoid known risk factors for
clinical disease, such as stress due to overcrowding. In the
absence of treatment, most infections are self-limiting in
10–14 days. However, secondary bacterial infections can
become severe. Complicating pneumonia is especially
­ ronchiseptica
devastating in kittens, particularly if B. b

23/04/16 1:29 pm

976

Multisystemic disorders

is involved, and may culminate in high mortality rates
among litters of affected kittens. The long-term prognosis is dependent on the establishment of a chronic carrier state and, potentially, anatomic damage to the eye
and turbinates (FHV-1) or the ­development of chronic
oral conditions, which are thought to be FCV related.
Associated clinical signs of infection in cats recovered
from acute infection are usually intermittent (sneezing,
ocular and nasal discharge), but can be continuous (ocular and/or nasal discharge, sneezing, gingivostomatitis).
Following recovery from acute infection, development of
a carrier state is common for both viruses. It is thought
that many FCV-infected cats will develop a carrier state
for months to years following infection, and almost all
FHV-1 infected cats develop a carrier state following
recovery that will persist for the life of the cat.

Prevention
Both parenteral (killed and modified live) and topical (intranasal/intraocular) vaccines are commercially
available. Vaccination helps protect cats from the severe
effects of clinical disease if vaccinations are kept current. Vaccination of kittens is particularly important
and should commence at 8 weeks of age, with boosters
given every 3–4 weeks until 16–20 weeks old in privately
owned cats. In shelter-housed kittens, vaccination should
start as early as 4–6 weeks old, followed by boosters every
2–3 weeks until 16–20 weeks of age. Although parenteral
vaccine is used predominantly in clinical practice, intranasal vaccination has recently been shown to offer a clinical advantage and reduced post-vaccinal viral shedding
if administered concurrently with parenteral vaccine
in an experimental FHV-1 challenge study in kittens.
Another study of intranasal FHV-1 vaccination demonstrated cross-protection against B. bronchiseptica infection in a 7-day challenge model in kittens. Intranasal
vaccination should only be administered with a vaccine
approved for use by this route, and mild sneezing is
common for 3–5 days after vaccination. However, severe
clinical upper respiratory signs can occur if injectable vaccines are administered intranasally. The 2013 American
Association of Feline Practitioners Feline Vaccination
Advisory Panel Report recommends that boosters are
administered every 3 years from 1 year after the primary
series.

Public health implications
Despite concerns that human infection can result from
contact with an infected cat, the infections must be considered independent. Neither FHV-1 nor FCV is considered to be a human pathogen and, as such, poses no risk
to human health.

K22463_C021.indd 976

VIRULENT SYSTEMIC CALICIVIRUS INFECTION
Definition/overview
Since 1998, a small number of infectious disease outbreaks in the UK and the USA within cluster households
of cats has been associated with a virulent systemic
feline calicivirus (VS-FCV). Initially reported as ‘hemorrhagic feline calicivirus’, the limited number of infections
caused by this emerging pathogen has resulted in mortality rates of up to 67% in previously healthy adult cats.
Prior vaccination with a combination FHV-1/FCV vaccine
for the prevention of upper respiratory infections may
not provide cross-protection against the VS-FCV, because
in every outbreak of VS-FCV, a genetically distinct strain
of FCV has been involved.

Etiology
Caliciviruses comprise a large group of genetically
diverse viruses. Infections are reported in a variety of
species. The ability of FCV to infect cats, whether or not
they are vaccinated, and for infected cats to develop a
chronic carrier state associated with persistent shedding
from the nasopharynx, explains the high prevalence of
calicivirus in the general cat population. Although each
VS-FCV has been associated with a separate mutation of
one of the feline caliciviral strains, similar clinical presentations have been reported. Outbreaks have been
reported among both vaccinated and unvaccinated cats.
Index cases from all reported outbreaks have come from
crowded, high-stress environments, such as shelters, rescues, and sometimes veterinary clinics. This highly contagious virus is transmitted by infected cats and their
fomites; just a few hairs have acted as fomites and transmitted infection in some outbreaks.

Pathophysiology
Changes in the capsid gene of FCV, or in virus–host
interactions, are thought to be responsible for VS-FCV
infection. Affected cats develop acute systemic vascular
compromise and hemorrhagic fever-like signs. Physical
findings are likely to be associated with viral invasion
of epithelium and endothelium, host cytokine responses,
and cytolysis. Unlike the usual field strains of FCV, adult
cats are particularly affected by VS-FCV, perhaps because
the immune response to the virus is responsible for some
of the clinical manifestations of disease.

Clinical presentation
Initially, the infection may present as moderate to severe
upper respiratory infection. However, the disease rapidly progresses, and clinical signs include fever, facial
and limb edema, and ulceration and crusting of skin on

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Infectious diseases

the face, muzzle, feet, and pinnae. Viral invasion of both
epithelium and endothelium occurs and visceral involvement (lungs, pancreas, liver) can occur. DIC can ensue and
mortality rates are high, especially among adult cats.
Laboratory findings are nonspecific. Necropsy findings
include necrosis of major organs such as the liver, spleen,
pancreas, lung, and GI tract. Laboratory testing cannot
distinguish VS-FCV from regular field strains of FCV and
carriage rates for FCV are high (approximately 25–30%)
among the general feline population.

Differential diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes sepsis, vasculitis, systemic toxicity, envenomation, cutaneous neoplasia, or
severe viral upper respiratory infection. Systemic signs
may include laboratory and clinical evidence of acute
pancreatitis or acute liver failure (e.g. jaundice). Feline
panleukopenia virus is a differential diagnosis for sudden death, and can also be a comorbid infection, especially in shelter outbreaks.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Because of the high morbidity and mortality associated
with outbreaks, deaths usually occur over a relatively
short initial period, followed by prolonged clinical recovery for severely ill but surviving cats. If an outbreak can
be contained within a population, spread of the virus is
typically limited. However, VS-FCV is extremely easily
transmitted to other cats by fomites (hands, hair, clothing, food dishes); therefore, strict control procedures,
including isolation, quarantine, thorough disinfection
with appropriate agents, and the use of disposable personal protective equipment by all personnel in contact
with infected or exposed cats, must be implemented
in order to effectively contain an outbreak. Supportive
care is indicated, although the rapid course of infection
may not yield effective patient care and long-term survival. Because of vasculitis associated with VS-FCV, fluid
therapy might be more effectively administered orally
than IV. If possible, infected cats should be cared for on
an out-patient basis, by the minimum number of staff.
Ideally, catteries, rescues, shelters, and veterinary hospitals should be closed to prevent disease transmission
until the outbreak is under control.

Prevention
Population management by reduction of overcrowding
in multi-cat housing and adoption of healthy cats into
low density homes reduces the risk of a VS-FCV outbreak.
Vaccines have been introduced into the UK and the USA for
the prevention of VS-FCV infection (Tables 21.8 and 21.9).

K22463_C021.indd 977

977

However, every reported ­outbreak of VS-FCV has been due
to a genetically distinct viral strain. Additionally, protection is not provided until at least 2 weeks after the second vaccination with VS-FCV vaccines because they are
inactivated.

Public health implications
VS-FCV poses no known threat to human health.

FUNGAL AND PROTOZOAL INFECTIONS
FELINE CRYPTOCOCCOSIS
Definition/overview
Cryptococcosis is an important fungal disease of cats
worldwide and infection is usually via inhalation of
cryptococcal basidiospores from the environment. Eight
genotypes exist, with varying geographical distribution,
pathogenicity, and antimicrobial susceptibility. Infection
is usually in the nasal cavity, although CNS signs can
occur if infection breaks through the cribriform plate;
pulmonary infections are rare. Dermatologic infections
with ulcerative cutaneous lesions can also occur, as can
disseminated infections, which are associated with clinical signs including lethargy, cachexia, meningoencephalomyelitis, uveitis, chorioretinitis, osteomyelitis and
polyarthritis, systemic lymphadenitis, or multi-organ
involvement, including renal infection.

Etiology
Cryptococcus spp. are encapsulated yeasts and most feline
infections are due to C. neoformans and C. gattii (formerly
C. neoformans var. gattii). C. neoformans is usually associated with avian feces, particularly pigeon guano, but has
also been isolated from decaying vegetation such as eucalyptus leaves. Asymptomatic colonization of the respiratory tract is the most usual outcome of environmental
exposure.

Pathophysiology
The cryptococcal yeast capsule contains protective factors that can inhibit phagocytosis, so infection can be
disseminated via infected macrophages and neutrophils.
There is debate in the published literature regarding the
possible role of immunosuppression in clinical infection.
The incubation period varies from months to years and
fungal factors, such as infective burden, genotype, and
virulence factors, as well as the host immune response,
determine the outcome of exposure. Once established in
the nasal cavity or lung, hematogenous spread can occur
to the lymph nodes, eye, skin, and CNS.

23/04/16 1:29 pm

978

Multisystemic disorders

Clinical presentation

21.65

Cats with nasal cryptococcosis usually present with a
chronic unilateral nasal discharge, often accompanied
by unilateral or bilateral swelling that can be followed by
ulcerative nasofacial lesions (see Figures 21.28–21.30).
Submandibular lymph nodes are usually enlarged.
Nasopharyngeal granulomas can sometimes protrude
from the nostrils, causing dyspnea and open-mouth
breathing. Blindness can result from ocular infection and
if the cribriform plate is breached, intracranial neurologic signs, including blindness from optic neuritis, and/
or chorioretinitis, can ensue (Figure 21.65, see Figures
19.28–19.31). Dermatologic infection presents as single
or multiple ulcerated or non-ulcerated cutaneous masses.

Differential diagnosis
Cryptococcal rhinitis can cause similar signs to infections with FHV-1, FCV, Chlamydia felis, Bordetella
bronchiseptica, Mycoplasma felis, or Aspergillus spp; neoplasia (e.g. nasal lymphoma), foreign bodies (e.g. plant
awns), and oronasal fistulae should also be considered.
Ocular and CNS signs could also be caused by neoplasia (e.g. ­lymphoma, meningioma), toxoplasmosis, FIP, or
bacterial m
­ eningitis. The differential diagnosis for the
cutaneous form in cats includes other deep mycoses,
mycobacteriosis, ­
nocardiosis, neoplasia (e.g. squamous
cell carcinoma) ­
herpetic dermatitis, and eosinophilic
granuloma complex.

Diagnosis
The latex cryptococcal antigen agglutination test (LCAT)
to detect capsular antigen in serum, CSF, or urine is the
diagnostic test of choice. Diagnostic accuracy can be
improved by pre-treating samples with heat and a proteinase (pronase, often included in commercial diagnostic kits), since false-negative results can occur. Cytology,
histology, and culture should be performed in suspected
cryptococcal cases that are LCAT negative. Cytologic
examination of tissue aspirates, infected body fluids,
or impression smears of cutaneous lesions or biopsies,
stained with Romanowsky-type stains (Wright, Giemsa,
Diff-Quik®), usually reveal pink to violet round or budding extracellular Cryptococcus organisms with thick
unstained capsules (see Figure 21.34). Histopathology
can also be performed on biopsy specimens. Cryptococcal
culture can be performed using Sabouraud dextrose agar
or on bacterial standard media after incubation for 10
days; the addition of antibiotics to media might prevent
overgrowth by secondary bacterial isolates from contaminated sites such as the nasal cavity. Diagnostic imaging,

K22463_C021.indd 978

Figure 21.65. A funduscopic view showing cryptococcal
chorioretinitis in a cat. (Courtesy D. Brooks)

including radiography and advanced imaging (CT and
MRI) when appropriate, should be performed for further
evaluation of clinical signs.

Management
Published prospective controlled studies do not exist
for the treatment of cryptococcal infections. Sinonasal
­disease is often treated with a combination of debulking therapy followed by prolonged courses of azole therapy (itraconazole 50–100 mg/cat PO q24h; fluconazole
50 mg/cat PO q24h; or ketoconazole 10 mg/kg PO q12h),
sometimes in combination with amphotericin B. Regular
(1–2 monthly) liver enzyme testing should be performed
for possible azole-related hepatotoxicity and treatment
should continue until the LCAT titer is zero. A 4–5-fold
reduction in LCAT titer indicates an adequate response;
LCAT titers should be repeated every 3–6 months thereafter so that recrudescent infections can be diagnosed
early. Amphotericin B is the most efficacious anti-­
cryptococcal drug and can be administered as amphotericin deoxycholate (0.5 mg/kg per cat of 5 mg/ml stock
solution diluted in 350 ml of 0.45% NaCl with 2.5% dextrose SC two or three times weekly to a cumulative dose
of 10–15 mg/kg; nephrotoxicity can occur) or as liposomal
amphotericin B (1–1.5 mg/kg IV q48h to a cumulative
dose of 12–15 mg/kg; administer as a 1–2 mg/ml solution
in 5% dextrose by IV infusion over 1–2 hours; this is less
nephrotoxic than amphotericin B deoxycholate, but azotemia can occur). Monotherapy with 5-flucytosine should
not be used because of the potential for drug resistance
to develop, but it is synergistic with amphotericin B
(25–50 mg/kg PO q6h). The combination of flucytosine and

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Infectious diseases

amphotericin B is recommended for feline CNS infections
or cats that fail azole therapy. Fluconazole can be substituted for 5-­flucytosine in CNS infections if 5
­ -flucytosine
is u
­naffordable, as it can penetrate the blood–brain
barrier.
Localized cutaneous disease can often be treated
­successfully with fluconazole (10 mg/kg PO q12h) until
lesions are completely resolved and cryptococcal LCAT
titer reduces to zero. As with sinonasal or CNS infections, a 4–5-fold reduction in LCAT titer indicates an adequate response and LCAT titers should be repeated every
3–6 months thereafter so that recrudescent infections can
be diagnosed early.

Prevention
Avoidance of exposure to environmental sources can usually be achieved by indoor only housing; however, cases
have occurred in indoor only cats in endemic areas.

Public health implications
Infection is acquired from direct exposure to contaminated environmental sources such as avian guano and
rotting vegetation, such as eucalyptus bark and leaves.
Since there is no aerosolization of cryptococcal organisms from infected tissues, infection is not transmitted
between animals or from infected animals to people.

FELINE ASPERGILLOSIS
(See also Chapter 4: Respiratory disorders.)

Definition/overview
Although aspergillosis does occur in the cat, the incidence
of infection is far less than that in the dog. There are two
anatomic forms of upper respiratory tract aspergillosis
in cats and both commence in the nasal cavity: sinonasal
aspergillosis and, more commonly (65% cases), invasive
sino-­orbital aspergillosis. This is in contrast with the dog,
in which 99% of cases are noninvasive and sinonasal.
Disseminated aspergillosis is typically associated with
immunosuppression and while it has been reported in
the cat, it is rare. Invasive focal (nonupper respiratory
tract) infections have also been the subject of rare feline
case reports.

Etiology
Aspergillosis is caused by several species of fungus of the
genus Aspergillus, which occurs in rotting vegetation,
moldy hay, and sewage. Animals become infected through
inhalation of airborne spores. A. fumigatus and A. niger are
most commonly associated with sinonasal aspergillosis,

K22463_C021.indd 979

979

while A. felis, a newly described A. ­fumigatus-like fungus,
is the most common isolate responsible for sino-orbital
aspergillosis.

Pathophysiology
Colonization is usually prevented by a local immune
response to inhaled spores involving mucociliary clearance, macrophages, and dendritic cells that recognize
specific fungal epitopes. Infection usually occurs in young
to middle aged cats, and brachycephalic breeds, such as
Himalayans, are predisposed to upper respiratory tract
aspergillosis.

Clinical presentation
Cats with upper respiratory tract aspergillosis can present with sneezing, stertor, unilateral or bilateral serous
to mucopurulent nasal discharge, mild ipsilateral mandibular lymphadenopathy, and clinical signs relating to
periorbital involvement such as exophthalmos. Epistaxis,
pyrexia, and/or a discharging sinus or soft tissue mass
involving the nasal bone or frontal sinus are less commonly seen.

Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses include viral upper respiratory
disease (FHV-1 and/or FCV), nasal cryptococcosis or other
fungal infection (e.g. sporotrichosis, phaeohyphomycoses), nasal neoplasia (e.g. lymphoma, squamous cell
­carcinoma), nasal foreign body, penetrating bite wound,
tooth root abscess, oronasal fistula, trauma to the nasal
cavity or frontal sinus, or congenital abnormalities such
as choanal atresia or palatine defects.

Diagnosis
Diagnostic tools include serology, radiography, advanced
imaging (CT and/or MRI), rhinosinuscopy, cytology,
­histology, fungal culture, and molecular identification.
Identification of fungal hyphae on cytology or histologic
examination of biopsy specimens or sinonasal fungal
plaques can confirm aspergillosis. Ventrodorsal radiography with the animal’s mouth open usually reveals
major lysis of the turbinates and increased radiolucency.
CT scanning has become the imaging technique of choice
for sinonasal aspergillosis because it shows clearly
the destruction of the turbinates, increased soft tissue
­attenuation in the nasal cavity, and fluid or soft tissue
accumulation in the frontal and sphenoid sinuses; signs
are usually bilateral. MRI is preferred for assessment of
intracranial soft tissue. In sino-orbital aspergillosis, a
­ventromedial orbital mass with dorsolateral displacement of the globe and lytic lesions in the paranasal

23/04/16 1:29 pm

980

Multisystemic disorders

bones are also visualized. The cribriform plate should be
inspected for integrity before topical antifungal treatment is considered. Nasopharyngoscopy, rhinoscopy,
and/or sinuscopy usually reveals white to greenish-gray
colonies, which are typical of nasal aspergillosis.
Hematology is ­unremarkable, and a stress or inflammatory leukogram with eosinophilia can be found; mild to
severe hyperglobulinemia on serum biochemistry is relatively common.

Management
Evidence-based treatment protocols from prospective
controlled studies are not currently available for feline
aspergillosis. However, before treatment commences, the
fungal isolate and its susceptibility should be identified
and the integrity of the cribriform plate should be determined on CT examination. Endoscopy and saline irrigation should be used to débride fungal plaques from the
nasal cavity and frontal sinuses. Pre-treatment assessment of renal and liver function should be undertaken
because of the hepatotoxic and nephrotoxic nature of the
systemic therapies used.
For noninvasive sinonasal infections (intact cribriform
plate), topical 1-hour intranasal infusions with 1% clotrimazole or enilconazole can be administered under general anesthesia. Polyethylene glycol must be used as the
vehicle for clotrimazole, since polypropylene glycol can
cause severe mucosal edema and ulceration. The head
should be tilted to ensure drainage of the infusion at the
end of the procedure.
For invasive sinonasal infections (paranasal soft
tissue infiltration and orbital involvement, and/or
interruption of the cribriform plate), systemic antifungal therapy using itraconazole (10 mg/kg PO q24h
with food; hepatotoxicity can occur), or posaconazole
(2.5–3.75 mg/kg q12h with food; hepatotoxicity can
occur), perhaps combined with amphotericin B deoxycholate (0.5 mg/kg per cat of 5 mg/ml stock solution
diluted in 350 ml of 0.45% NaCl with 2.5% dextrose
SC two or three times weekly to a ­cumulative dose of
10–15 mg/kg; nephrotoxicity can occur) or liposomal
amphotericin B (1–1.5 mg/kg IV q48h to a cumulative
dose of 12–15 mg/kg; administer as a 1–2 mg/ml solution in 5% dextrose by IV infusion over 1–2 hours; this
is less nephrotoxic than amphotericin B deoxycholate,
but azotemia can occur), are the preferred therapeutic
options for feline sinonasal aspergillosis.
Treatment of sino-orbital aspergillosis is based on
systemic therapy with itraconazole or posaconazole,
combined with amphotericin B, as described above. At
least 6 months of therapy is required and reinfections or
relapses can occur.

K22463_C021.indd 980

A minimum of a 2–3-month course of systemic
­antifungal therapy should be administered. Aspergillus
spp. are intrinsically resistant to fluconazole therapy.
Treatment should be continued for at least 1 month
beyond cessation of clinical signs. The prognosis for
feline sinonasal aspergillosis is generally favorable, while
sino-orbital aspergillosis has a poor prognosis, although
there are only a handful of published case reports. Pretreatment surgical débridement should be considered on
an ­individual case basis.

FELINE TOXOPLASMOSIS
Definition/overview
Feline toxoplasmosis is caused by infection with the obligate intracellular coccidian parasite Toxoplasma gondii.
Infections are known to occur on a worldwide basis, with
estimates of up to approximately 30% of clinically ill cats
having serologic evidence of exposure; seroprevalence is
lowest in areas of low humidity. The organism is capable
of infecting virtually all species of warm-blooded animals, including humans, although cats are the definitive
hosts for the parasites.

Etiology
Infection among cats can occur subsequent to ingestion
of infectious oocysts, or transplacentally or via transmammary transmission among kittens born to infected
queens. While infection via ingestion of sporulated
oocysts in cat feces is possible, this is thought to be a
rare source of infection because of fastidious elimination
habits in cats. Cats with outdoor access are especially
at risk of exposure subsequent to hunting and ingesting T. gondii cysts in the tissues of intermediate hosts or
mechanical vectors such as cockroaches, earthworms, and
rodents; indoor only cats can also have access to some of
these intermediate hosts. In addition, feeding raw meat
to cats has been associated with infection. Tissue cysts
(bradyzoites) are likely to persist lifelong in infected cats
and dogs; therefore, serum antibodies indicate current
infection.

Pathophysiology
As the cat is the definitive host of T. gondii, it is the only
species where the parasite undergoes the enteroepithelial cycle, where infection in intestinal cells undergoes
asexual and sexual phases to produce oocysts, which are
passed in the feces. After primary infection, cats shed
unsporulated oocysts in the feces for 3–21 days. Oocysts
sporulate and become infective in 1–5 days under suitable
environmental temperature and humidity conditions
before being ingested by warm-blooded intermediate

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Infectious diseases

hosts. Oocyst shedding after the primary infection in cats
is rare, even in immune suppressed cats. Clinical abnormalities associated with the enteroepithelial cycle are
rarely identified in cats. Self-limiting small bowel diarrhea of 1–2 weeks’ duration has been reported in approximately 10–20% of cats.
In the cat and all other mammals, extraintestinal
infection occurs. After contact with cat feces containing
sporlated oocysts, or ingestion of bradyzoites in infected
tissues, sarcocysts penetrate the intestinal wall and
develop into an actively replicating phase (tachyzoites)
in infected tissues. As the host immune system responds,
parasitic replication slows and bradyzoites are formed in
tissue cysts.
Clinical illness subsequent to the ingestion of tissue cysts or oocysts, or reactivation of latent infection
(extraintestinal infection), is relatively uncommon in cats.
The reason that some cats develop significant clinical disease while many others do not is most likely dependent
on parasite virulence factors and the immune response
of the host. Immunosuppression due to high-dose corticosteroid therapy and FIV infection has been associated with recrudescent T. gondii infection. Disseminated
­toxoplasmosis has been reported in association with FIV,
FeLV, or FIP and after chronic immunosuppressive doses
of cyclosporine.

981

indicated and these viral infections may be an important
underlying disorder.

Diagnosis
A variety of hematologic and biochemical changes are
reported in cats with extraintestinal T. gondii infection.
However, the inconsistency with which these changes
occur diminishes their diagnostic value. Mild anemia,
leukocytosis, and eosinophilia are reported. In addition,
hypoalbuminemia in the presence of polyclonal hyperglobulinemia has been reported in cats with chronic
toxoplasmosis. Depending on the degree of hepatic
necrosis associated with infection, liver enzymes and
serum bilirubin may be dramatically increased. Creatine
kinase is elevated if tachyzoites cause myocyte necrosis.
Infected cats with radiographic evidence of pneumonia
may demonstrate evidence of T. gondii on fine-needle
21.66

Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of extraintestinal toxoplasmosis, if present,
are likely to include fever, ocular inflammation, ataxia,
seizures, muscle pain, and dyspnea, depending on the
anatomic location of infection. Hepatitis (occasionally
with icterus), pancreatitis, myocarditis with associated
arrhythmia, encephalitis (Figures 21.66, 21.67), and
a variety of ocular signs such as uveitis, chorioretinitis, glaucoma, and retinal detachment have also been
reported (see Figure 19.27). Cardiac arrhythmia may be
associated with sudden death in some cats. Among kittens, ocular disease, fading kittens, and stillbirths are
commonly associated with transplacental infection.

21.67

Differential diagnosis
Bacterial pneumonia with respiratory distress is the most
important differential diagnosis for clinical pulmonary
toxoplasmosis in cats. In addition, sepsis, pancreatitis,
hepatitis, and cardiomyopathy should also be considered,
depending on the localization of tissue cysts. Neospora
caninum infection is uncommon, but has been reported
to manifest signs similar to toxoplasmosis in cats. Among
kittens, sudden death may be reported, so FPL virus
infection should be considered. FeLV and FIV testing are

K22463_C021.indd 981

Figures 21.66, 21.67 This 4-year-old Domestic Shorthair
cat has diffuse Toxoplasma encephalitis (21.66). The cat was
euthanized and the diagnosis confirmed on necropsy. The
ventral view of the brain (21.67) shows swelling of the piriform
processes associated with the temporal lobes. (Courtesy
M. Schaer)

23/04/16 1:29 pm

982

Multisystemic disorders

aspiration of the lung. Tachyzoites can also be recovered
from peritoneal and thoracic fluids of infected cats.
Routine fecal examination of cats suspected of having
toxoplasmosis is rarely successful in confirming a diagnosis, as most cats are no longer shedding oocysts by
the time clinical signs of extraintestinal infection occur.
Following primary infection, cats usually shed T. gondii
oocysts for less than 3 weeks (usually 1–2 weeks) and
repeat oocyst shedding is rare, even in immune suppressed cats. Furthermore, the extremely small size of the
oocysts (10 × 12 μm) and the lack of experience of most
personnel in recognizing T. gondii oocysts justifies alternative diagnostic studies. Fecal PCR assays are available
for T. gondii, but the test has poor predictive value for the
same reasons given for fecal flotation.
Since infected cats harbor T. gondii tissue cysts for
life, it is possible to detect IgM and IgG class antibodies
in feline sera. Anti-T. gondii IgM antibodies are usually
associated with recent or recrudescent extraintestinal
infection (from 2–4 weeks until 16 weeks after infection; persistent IgM titers can occur in FIV-infected cats),
but positive results do not correlate with active disease.
Anti-T. gondii IgG antibodies generally indicate infection
of at least 10 days’ duration, but again, positive results
do not correlate with active disease. Serum agglutination
assays are designed to detect all antibody classes, but
can give false-negative results when only IgM antibodies
are present and results do not correlate with active disease. A tentative antemortem diagnosis of toxoplasmosis
in cats should be based on a combination of: (1) an IgM
titer higher than 1:64; (2) a four-fold or greater increase
in IgG titer; (3) clinical signs consistent with extraintestinal toxoplasmosis; and (4) positive response to treatment
for toxoplasmosis. On necropsy, cats that have died from
toxoplasmosis are most likely to manifest evidence of tissue inflammation and necrosis in the liver, mesenteric
lymph nodes, pancreas, and lungs.

Management
Treatment/prognosis
Cats with extraintestinal toxoplasmosis can be treated
with clindamycin (10–15 mg/kg PO q12h for 4 weeks) or
trimethoprim/sulfa combination antimicrobial drugs
(15 mg/kg PO q12h for 4 weeks). Clinical improvement is
expected within 7 days following onset of therapy. If clinical response does not occur with one drug within 7 days,
therapy with the other drug can be tried. Cats with clinical uveitis associated with toxoplasmosis may be treated
with topical or systemic corticosteroids, to prevent secondary lens luxation and glaucoma. Cats with hepatic,

K22463_C021.indd 982

CNS, or pulmonary disease, and those with concurrent
FeLV or FIV, carry a significantly poorer prognosis with
treatment. Complete resolution of signs might not occur
in neurologic infections after clinical resolution.

Prevention
No drug has been shown to eliminate extraintestinal
T. gondii infection in cats or dogs, and reactivated infection is always possible. Although an oral vaccine against
toxoplasmosis has been demonstrated to reduce oocyst
shedding in infected cats under research conditions,
no such vaccine is commercially available at this time.
Preventing kittens and cats from hunting (including
ingesting ­transport hosts such as cockroaches) and feeding only commercially prepared cat food, without raw
meat supplements, is a highly effective means of preventing exposure. Meat that has been frozen prior to feeding
can harbor infectious tissue cysts.

Public health implications
Since the cat is a definitive host for T. gondii and is capable of excreting oocysts in feces during the enteroepithelial phase of infection, the cat does represent a potential
threat to human health, although oocyst excretion is very
rare after the primary infection. Administration of clindamycin (20 mg/kg PO q24h) can reduce the period of
oocyst shedding if it is demonstrated in an individual cat.
Additionally, because of fastidious grooming habits, cats
are unlikely to harbor infective oocysts on their hair coat.
However, during the period of initial oocyst excretion in
the feces, cats are unlikely to manifest any clinical signs
of disease. Excreted oocysts are not infectious until they
have undergone sporulation (approximately 48 hours at
room temperature, although reduced sporulation times
can occur at higher environmental temperatures), and
oocysts are resistant to disinfectants. Sporulated oocysts
are more environmentally resistant than unsporulated
oocysts.
Cat owners who are regarded as being at risk of infection, such as immunocompromised individuals or seronegative pregnant women, with T. gondii can take basic
precautions to avoid exposure. If possible, at-risk individuals should not have access to litter pans; however,
cleaning litter boxes at least every 24 hours will minimize the chance of exposure to sporulated oocysts. Since
sporulated oocysts have demonstrated their ability to
survive in a wide range of environmental temperatures
and humidity (up to 18 months or more), avoiding locations where cats are likely to defecate or wearing gloves
while working in soil can minimize the risk of exposure

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Infectious diseases

to humans. To clean contaminated litter pans, boiling
water is superior to ­liquid ­disinfectants. Steam cleaning
can be used to decontaminate hard, impervious surfaces.
The cat is a rare source of direct infection to people,
since infective oocysts are only passed during the primary infection in cats, infected oocysts are unlikely to be
found on the hair coat during primary infection, and cats
bury their feces. Most human infections are acquired by
eating undercooked meat containing tissue cysts, and the
prevalence of protective antibody titers against T. gondii is
high in people who eat meat. Human infection can result
in mild self-limiting malaise, fever, and lymphadenopathy, and is commonly misdiagnosed. Primary infection
during pregnancy can result in clinical toxoplasmosis
in the fetus, with stillbirths, CNS, and ocular disease.
Toxoplasmic encephalitis from reactivated infections

K22463_C021.indd 983

983

occurs in approximately 10% of people with HIV/AIDS
as CD4+ T cell counts decline. Assessment of human
risk of infection is best carried out by d
­ etermination of
anti-T. gondii antibody protection status, as protection
rates are very high in most populations.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (2010) (eds.) Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 7th edn. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.
Greene CE (2011) (ed.) Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 4th
edn. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.
Plumb DC (2011) (ed.) Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook, 7th
edn. PharmaVet Inc, Stockholm.
Sykes JE (2013) (ed.) Canine and Feline Infectious Diseases, 1st
edn. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis.

23/04/16 1:29 pm

This page intentionally left blank

985

Chapter 22
Immunologic disorders
Michael J. Day

INTRODUCTION
The immune system interfaces with virtually all other
body systems and consequently almost all diseases have
an immunologic aspect. For example, the immune system
will respond appropriately to the presence of infectious
or neoplastic disease, or the existence of a chronic disease state may lead to secondary immunosuppression.
More importantly, there is a wide range of diseases that
have an immunopathological basis and these are the
focus of this chapter. In order to fully understand these
primary immunologic disorders, a solid working knowledge of the immune system is required. This chapter
will briefly overview current knowledge of the immune
response and immunopathology, and then discuss the
four major categories of immune-mediated disease:
(1) allergic disease; (2) autoimmune disease; (3) primary
immunodeficiency disease; and (4) immune system neoplasia. Many of the key diseases within these groups are
discussed in the individual systems-based chapters of
this book. These will be cross-referenced from this chapter, and only selected immunologic disorders not covered
elsewhere will be presented here.

innate immune system and are represented by structures
such as:

●● The thick, keratinized epidermis of the skin, which is
coated by antimicrobial secretions of the sebaceous
and sweat glands (Figure 22.1).
●● The mucociliary escalator of the lower respiratory
tract.
●● The peristaltic motion of the intestinal tract, coupled
with the rapid turnover of enterocytes and secretion of a wide range of enzymatic and antimicrobial
substances.
Similarly, the natural microflora of many of these surfaces provides powerful competitive exclusion to pathogens and may also be considered an innate protective
feature.

22.1

THE IMMUNE RESPONSE
The immune system may be fundamentally considered in terms of innate and adaptive immunity. Innate
immunity encompasses the more primitive, nonspecific
defense mechanisms of the body, while adaptive immunity is ­antigen-specific, considerably more potent, and
encompasses the phenomenon of immunologic memory.
It is now known that activity within the innate immune
system directs the nature of the subsequent adaptive response. The key cell that links these two systems is
the dendritic antigen presenting cell (APC).

Innate immunity
The innate immune system is most dominant at the
mucocutaneous barriers of the body, which are the front
line of exposure to pathogens. The microanatomic aspects
of these barriers themselves are considered part of the

K22463_C022.indd 985

Figure 22.1 Section of skin from a cat displaying features of
the innate immune system including the keratinized epidermal
barrier, sebaceous gland secretions, and resident leukocytes
within the epidermis and superficial dermis.

25/04/16 11:25 am

986

Multisystemic disorders

These barrier functions are supported by the soluble and cellular constituents of the innate immune
system. The former include secreted immunologic molecules such as components of the alternative complement
pathway, antimicrobial peptides such as the ‘defensins’,
selected proinflammatory cytokines (such as interleukin [IL]-1, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-α), and
polyreactive IgA and IgM. The cellular components of
the innate immune system include nonspecific phagocytic cells (neutrophils and macrophages), the natural
killer (NK) cells, which undertake cytotoxic destruction
of target cells (e.g. virally infected cells or tumor cells) in
a less specific fashion than T lymphocytes, and the specialized subset of T lymphocytes that express an antigen-­
specific T-cell receptor (TCR) comprised of a γ and δ chain
(γδ TCR).
These components of innate immunity work together
to provide immediate protection following exposure to a
potential pathogen. Although a relatively less effective
means of immune defense, the innate immune system is
crucial for the provision of this protective cover until the
adaptive response is activated, mobilized, and recruited
to the site of pathogen exposure.

The dendritic cell; link between innate and
adaptive immunity
The dendritic APC provides the link between innate and
adaptive immunity. Dendritic cells are widely distributed
throughout the tissues of the body, and are particularly
prominent at the mucocutaneous barriers. Some of the
best characterized dendritic cells are those of the skin,
and these include the epidermal Langerhans cell and the
dermal dendritic cells. The primary role of the dendritic
cell is the capture of foreign antigen as it penetrates these
barriers, the ‘processing’ of this antigen to a form which
can stimulate adaptive immunity, and the translocation
of antigen from the peripheral point of exposure to the
regional draining lymphoid tissue for induction of the
adaptive immune response (Figure 22.2).
The initial encounter between foreign antigen and
dendritic cell involves a series of dendritic cell receptor
molecules termed ‘pattern recognition receptors’ (PRRs)
or ‘Toll-like receptors’ (TLRs). These PRRs are expressed
either on the surface membrane of the dendritic cell or
within the cytoplasm. They interact with ligands that
are derived from foreign antigen (e.g. pathogenic microorganisms) or damaged body cells. These ligands are
termed ‘pathogen-associated molecular patterns’ (PAMPs)
or ‘microbe-associated molecular patterns’ and include
structural antigens expressed on the surface of microbes
(e.g. lipopolysaccharide) or their internal constituents

K22463_C022.indd 986

22.2
Antigen
Skin

Lymph node

Dendritic cell

Figure 22.2 The dendritic cell is the key link between the
innate and adaptive immune systems. In this example,
percutaneously absorbed antigen is taken up by an epidermal
Langerhans cell and translocated to regional lymphoid tissue
via the dermal lymphatic drainage.

(e.g. portions of microbial DNA). Ligands derived from
altered tissue cells are referred to as ‘damage-­associated
molecular patterns’. The interaction between PRR
and PAMP permits the foreign antigen to be internalized into the cytoplasm of the dendritic cell where it
may enter one of two distinct intracellular antigenprocessing pathways. The first of these pathways involves
the enzymatic degradation of the antigen within a
cytoplasmic ­
membrane-enclosed compartment. Within
this ­
compartment, the ­
complex antigenic structure is
degraded into small peptide constituents (of the order of
25 amino acids in length), which become associated with
molecules that line the inner surface of the compartment.
These are the class II molecules of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC), which are pivotal to the generation
of the immune response. Following this ‘processing’ event,
the combination of MHC class II and peptide becomes
re-expressed on the surface of the dendritic cell, such that
the dendritic cell is now ‘presenting’ the a
­ ntigen–MHC
complex (thus the terminology ‘antigen-­presenting cell’).
The second intracellular antigen-processing pathway
involves degradation of antigen within a distinct cytoplasmic compartment known as the proteasome. Within
the proteasome, slightly smaller peptide fragments
(10 amino acids in length) are generated, which are then
translocated into the cytoplasmic Golgi apparatus where
they become associated with class I molecules of the MHC.
These complexes of class I MHC and antigenic peptide are
also then expressed on the surface of the dendritic cell.
Which of these intracellular processing pathways
is activated is determined by the nature of the foreign antigen and, therefore, which of the dendritic cell
PRRs become engaged. Broadly speaking, the majority

25/04/16 11:25 am

Immunologic disorders

of antigens that are derived from outside of the body
(exogenous antigens) and require phagocytosis or pinocytosis enter the MHC class II expression pathway. In contrast, antigens that are derived from within tissue cells
(­
endogenous antigens [e.g. viral antigens synthesized
in the cytoplasm from viral genetic material within the
cell] or tumor antigens expressed by a tissue cell) are
processed by the class I pathway. These pathways are not
mutually exclusive, so it is possible for an antigen to be
processed by both routes (‘cross-presentation’).
The antigen-processing procedure involves not only
expression of MHC–peptide on the surface of the dendritic cell, but the upregulation of other (co-stimulatory)
molecules on the dendritic cell surface and the secretion of soluble intercellular messengers (cytokines) by
the activated APC (Figure 22.3). Again, the nature of these
co-­stimulatory molecules and the type of cytokines are
directed by the nature of the inciting antigen and the
intracellular signaling pathways triggered when that
antigen binds to particular dendritic cell PRRs. All of
these outcomes of antigen processing (e.g. presentation
by MHC I or II, the nature of co-stimulatory molecules and
cytokines) will in turn determine the type of adaptive
immune response that is made to the antigen. Thus, the
dendritic cell truly is the link between innate and adaptive immunity and the key factor determining the quality
of the adaptive immune response.
All of the events described above occur within the
dendritic APC, but the second major role of this cell is in
22.3
Cytokine

Antigen

MHC

Antigenic
peptide
Co-stimulatory
molecule

PRR

Dendritic cell

Figure 22.3 The APC (dendritic cell) engages foreign antigen
via surface PRRs. The antigen is internalized, processed,
and re-presented on the surface of the cell associated with
a class II MHC molecule. The dendritic cell also upregulates
the expression of co-stimulatory molecules and secretes
co-stimulatory cytokines.

K22463_C022.indd 987

987

translocation of antigen from the site of exposure (e.g. at
a mucocutaneous surface) to the regional draining lymphoid tissue. This procedure involves the antigen-laden
dendritic cell entering the tissue lymphatics where it
travels to the lymph node and enters the T-cell area (paracortex) of the node.

The adaptive immune response
Once the antigen-laden dendritic cell arrives in the
lymph node paracortex it remains relatively stationary,
while numerous T lymphocytes approach it to ‘test out’
whether their TCRs are designed to be able to bind to the
combination of antigenic peptide and MHC expressed by
the APC. These T cells express a receptor comprised of an
α and β chain, the antigen-binding capacity of which has
been predetermined by gene rearrangements within the
cell. The T- and B-cell populations of the body between
them bear an enormous range of receptor specificities (the receptor ‘repertoire’), which are designed to be
able to interact with any foreign antigen that may ever
be encountered by that individual. In order to maximize
the potential for any one T or B cell to encounter the antigen that they are ‘pre-programmed’ to recognize, the lymphoid cells of the body continually recirculate through
a complex pathway involving the tissues, lymphatics,
and vascular circulation (‘immune surveillance’). The
recirculating T cells within the lymph node paracortex may or may not be relevant to a particular antigen
expressed by any one dendritic cell at any time. In-vivo
video microscopy of labeled T cells and dendritic cells
has shown that an APC within the paracortex might be
expected to be approached by up to 500 different T cells
each hour.
Possibly the most amazing feature of the immune
response is that such interactions between APCs and
T cells do occur and result in generation of the adaptive
immune response. For antigens that have never before
been encountered by the individual, the ‘naïve’ T cell that
associates with the APC is not yet committed to generating an adaptive immune response of any particular type.
Again, it is the dendritic cell that now determines the
nature of this adaptive response by the way in which it
signals the naïve T cell.
Dendritic cells expressing antigenic peptide primarily
associated with MHC class II are most likely to stimulate
that subset of T cells bearing the CD4 (‘cluster of differentiation’ molecule number 4) molecule (T helper [Th]
cells), whereas class I-peptide expression is more likely to
activate the CD8-expressing T-cell subset (T cytotoxic [Tc]
cells). There are a number of key functional subpopulations of CD4+ T cells and which of these is preferentially

25/04/16 11:25 am

988

Multisystemic disorders

activated by activation of the naïve CD4+ T cell precursor
by the dendritic cell determines the functional nature of
the ensuing adaptive immune response.
Signaling of the naïve CD4+ T cell, involving release
of APC-derived cytokines such as IL-12, IL-18, and IL-27
and activation through the T-cell intracellular signaling
pathway STAT 4, results in differentiation of the naïve
cell into a mature Th1 cell. The Th1 cell is defined functionally by production of the cytokines IL-2 and interferon (IFN)-γ and by the initiation of an adaptive immune
response dominated by cell-mediated immunity (CMI).
CMI involves the activation of cytotoxic CD8+ T cells and
NK cells for destruction of virally infected or neoplastic target cells, or the activation of macrophages to permit destruction of an intracellular pathogen such as
Leishmania, Salmonella, or Mycobacterium. The Th1-driven
immune response features only limited antibody production of those IgG subclasses that might be involved in
opsonization or antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Consequently, the antigens that induce this form
of immune response are largely exogenous pathogens of
the type listed above (Figure 22.4).

Virus or intracellular protozon

Helminth or yeast

Naïve T cell

22.4

IL-4
IL-5

IL-12
IL-18
IL-27
Th1

Th2

IL-2, IFN-γ
Cell-mediated immunity

IL-4, IL-5, IL-6
IL-9, IL-13
Humoral immunity

Figure 22.4 Processed antigen is presented by the dendritic
cell to naïve CD4+ T lymphocytes. The nature of the inciting
antigen determines the type of stimulatory signal provided by
the dendritic cell and thus the pathway of differentiation of the
T cell. Differentiation towards Th1 promotes a cell-mediated
effector immune response, whereas the Th2 subpopulation
induces a humoral effector response.

K22463_C022.indd 988

By contrast, signaling of the naïve CD4+ T cell, i­ nvolving
release of APC-derived cytokines such as IL-4 and activation through the T-cell intracellular signaling pathway
STAT 6, results in differentiation of the naïve cell into a
mature Th2 cell. The Th2 cell is defined functionally by
production of the cytokines IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-9, and IL-13
and by the initiation of an adaptive immune response
dominated by humoral (antibody-mediated) immunity.
Such antibody responses (involving production of alternative IgG subclasses to those above, IgA and IgE) might
be required in adaptive immune responses driven by the
presence of pathogens such as yeasts, Escherichia coli, or
helminth parasites (Figure 22.4).
Activation of the naïve CD4+ T cell via the STAT 3 pathway and APC-derived IL-6, IL-23 or transforming growth
factor (TGF)-β results in differentiation into a Th17 cell.
Th17 cells are defined by their production of IL-17 and
have a key role in the defense against bacterial and
­fungal infections.
Although less well understood, the dendritic cell–T cell
encounter is also likely to control the differentiation of
the subsets of CD4+ T cells that are involved in suppression
(or ‘downregulation’) of the immune response. The major
suppressive populations include the CD4+CD25+ ‘natural
suppressor cells’, which are constitutively present in the
body, the CD4+ IL-10 producing ‘induced suppressor cells’
(T regulatory cells [Tregs]), which are induced following
antigen exposure, and the Th3 cells that are important in
the regulation of mucosal immune responses and defined
by the production of TGF-β.
The activation of T cells by interaction with APCs
involves not only determination of the qualitative nature
of the adaptive immune response, but the expansion
of antigen-relevant clones of T cells via the process of
clonal proliferation. This generates large numbers of
antigen-specific T cells that mediate the effector immune
response. At least some of these T cells are required for
activation of antigen-specific B lymphocytes, which will
undertake the humoral immune response.
B-cell activation proceeds in a different fashion to that
described for T cells. B cells within the lymphoid tissue
reside in primary follicles. Antigen-specific B cells similarly require a combination of activation signals. The first
of these comes from the antigen itself, which is recognized by the B-cell receptor (BCR) or surface membrane
immunoglobulin. The naïve B cell expresses the combination of IgD and IgM receptor molecules of identical,
genetically determined, antigen specificity. The BCR recognizes a large, conformational determinant of antigen
(rather than an MHC-associated peptide fragment). This
antigenic determinant may be present in soluble form in

25/04/16 11:25 am

Immunologic disorders

the B cell environment or may be physically delivered on
the surface of an APC. Again, only those B cells bearing
antigen-relevant BCRs will be able to recognize antigen,
and continual B-cell recirculation is important to maximize the chance of this occurrence. For the majority of
(T-dependent) antigens, B-cell activation requires T-cell
help. It is now known that following Th cell activation
(as described above), some of these cells migrate from the
paracortex into the margins of primary follicles, where
they encounter B cells carrying receptors for the same
stimulating antigen (Figure 22.5).
Following BCR–antigen recognition, the B cell internalizes these surface molecules into a cytoplasmic compartment where there is antigen processing and association
with MHC class II molecules as described for the dendritic
cell. The B cell also presents these MHC–antigen complexes on its surface membrane. T-cell help for B-cell activation takes the form of:

●● TCR binding MHC–peptide on the B-cell surface.
●● The interaction of other co-stimulatory molecules on

989

22.5

Figure 22.5 Canine lymph node labeled to show expression of
the T-cell marker CD3. The image includes the junction between
paracortex and a primary lymphoid follicle. Scattered T cells
are found within the follicular (B cell) area. These helper cells
will provide co-stimulation for antigen-activated B cells and
generation of a secondary lymphoid follicle.

the surface of each cell.

22.6

Antigen

●● The release of co-stimulatory cytokines from the
T cell (e.g. IL-4, IL-5), which bind cytokine receptors
on the B-cell surface (Figure 22.6).

Co-stimulatory molecules
BCR

B-cell activation also results in clonal proliferation, which
in the case of a B cell is shown by the formation of a
­secondary follicle with a blastic germinal center and surrounding mantle zone of small lymphocytes. Additionally,
the stimulated B cells undergo the ‘immunoglobulin class
switch’, which involves genetic recombination to permit
expression of a single immunoglobulin class (generally
IgG, IgA, or IgE). The type of immunoglobulin is determined by the type of Th cell (Th1 versus Th2) and in turn
by the nature of the stimulating antigen (see above). For
example, an intestinal helminth parasite is most likely to
stimulate Th2 activation and IgE class switching within
the mesenteric lymph node. The end stage of B-cell activation is transformation of that B cell into a plasma cell,
which can actively secrete immunoglobulin of the pre-­
determined class and antigen specificity.
Having expanded antigen-specific T- and B-cell populations within the regional lymphoid tissue, the next
(effector) phase of the immune response necessitates
these cells leaving the node within efferent lymph,
which eventually drains into the vascular circulation.
The ­antigen-specific lymphocytes circulate in the blood
until they encounter modified endothelial cells bearing
molecules (‘vascular addressins’) that bind to ligands on
the circulating cells (‘homing receptors’) and enable the

K22463_C022.indd 989

B

Th

MHC

TCR

Cytokine
receptor
Cytokine

Figure 22.6 Provision of T-cell help for activation of a B cell.
The B lymphocyte recognizes intact antigen through surface
immunoglobulin (the B-cell receptor). The B cell internalizes
the antigen, processes it, and re-presents a peptide fragment
of antigen associated with an MHC class II molecule. The
T helper cell physically interacts with the B cell through the
TCR and engagement of co-stimulatory molecules expressed
on the surface of each cell. In addition, the T cell releases
co-stimulatory cytokine that binds cytokine receptor on the
target B cell.

circulating lymphocytes to be arrested in their flow and to
diapedese between endothelia into the tissue containing
the inciting antigen. Having attained this position, these
lymphocytes of the adaptive immune system are now able

25/04/16 11:25 am

990

Multisystemic disorders

to reinforce the innate immunity that has, to date, dealt
with the initiating pathogen. The nature of this effector
immune response is determined by the nature of the
pathogen and those aspects of the immunologic armory
that are best able to eliminate it. For example, the cutaneous immune response to Leishmania would best be served
by the action of Th1 lymphocytes producing IFN-γ, which
may stimulate parasitized macrophages and allow them
to destroy the pathogen that was replicating within their
cytoplasm. Concurrently, the activation of IgG-secreting
plasma cells would provide antigen-specific antibody that
might bind and neutralize free amastigotes that were
released from ruptured parasitized cells. In this instance,
a Th2 response with dominant humoral immunity would
not be protective, which is exactly the ­situation that arises
in susceptible dogs that succumb to the infection.
The final stage of the adaptive immune response
involves suppression of the response when it is no longer
required (i.e. when antigen is eliminated). Such suppression is an active event, and primarily involves the range
of Tregs described above. Through either physical contact
or inhibitory cytokine production, or both, suppressor
cells are able to inhibit the function or physically remove
(by induction of apoptosis) the effector populations. The
antigen-stimulated cells are never entirely removed, as
for each immune response that is made, a residual population of long-lived memory T and B lymphocytes persists, generally for the lifetime of the individual.

IMMUNOPATHOGENIC MECHANISMS
Despite the wide array of antigens that might potentially be encountered by an individual (e.g. infectious
agents, allergens, tissue alloantigens, autoantigens, tumor
antigens), the immune system generally responds to stimulation by using one or more of a series of well-­defined
immunopathogenic mechanisms. These were defined
many years ago by Gell and Coombs as types I to IV hypersensitivity, and this classification still provides a useful
framework for consideration of immune effector function.
These are best considered as ‘immunopathogenic mechanisms’ rather than ‘hypersensitivity mechanisms’ because
while they do form the basis for allergic (hypersensitivity) disease, the same mechanisms are involved in other
immune-mediated diseases (e.g. autoimmune disease)
and in beneficial immune responses to foreign antigens
(for which reason they probably evolved initially).

Type I (immediate) hypersensitivity
Type I hypersensitivity follows exposure to antigens that
selectively trigger Th2 lymphocytes and the production
of IgE antibodies. These antibodies bind specific receptor

K22463_C022.indd 990

molecules on the surface of basophils and tissue mast
cells, and when the sensitized individual is re-exposed
to antigen there is binding and cross-linking of these
cell-bound IgE molecules. This results in rapid (within
15–20 minutes, thus ‘immediate’ hypersensitivity) mast
cell or basophil degranulation, with the release of a wide
range of proinflammatory mediators that lead to the
well-­
recognized clinical effects of such reactions,
which may be localized or generalized (anaphylactic)
(Figures 22.7, 22.8). These effects include:

●● Vasodilation with tissue edema and egress of plasma
protein and leukocytes.

●● Bronchoconstriction via contraction of smooth
muscle.

●● Cutaneous pruritus caused by interaction with
­neurologic pathways.
The type I reaction probably evolved to provide protective
immunity in the case of intestinal helminth parasitism,
but it is now most widely recognized as the mechanism
underlying the range of allergic diseases of the skin, conjunctivae, respiratory tract, and gastrointestinal tract of
the dog and cat.
Allergen

22.7

APC
Th

B

Plasma cell

lgE

Crosslinking

Degranulation

Mast cell

Vasodilation
Bronchoconstriction
Pruritus

Figure 22.7 The type I hypersensitivity reaction. Presentation
of allergen by dendritic cells results in stimulation of Th2
immunity, with the generation of allergen-specific IgE
antibodies that coat mucocutaneous mast cells. On re-exposure
to allergen there is mast cell degranulation, which mediates the
classical clinical features of this reaction.

25/04/16 11:25 am

Immunologic disorders

22.8

A

Macrophage

C3b receptor
Fc receptor
Antibody

B

991

H2O

22.9

Membrane
attack
complex

Target
cell
Complement
Phagocytosis

Figure 22.8 Skin biopsy from a 5-year-old Domestic Shorthair
cat with pruritus and miliary dermatitis. The histopathologic
features are characteristic of a type I hypersensitivity reaction.
There is a mixed inflammatory infiltration surrounding the
superficial dermal vessel (asterisk), which includes small
clusters of mast cells (stars) and eosinophils (arrowheads).

Osmotic lysis

Figure 22.9 The type II hypersensitivity reaction. Immunologic
sensitization leads to production of antibody that coats a
target cell and activates complement deposition via the
classical pathway. (A) The target cell is thus opsonized for
phagocytosis by a macrophage bearing Fc and C3b receptors.
(B) Alternatively, the membrane attack complex of complement
inserts through the cell membrane, creating an ionic imbalance
and resulting in a net influx of water into the target cell
cytoplasm with subsequent lysis of the target.

Type II (antibody-mediated) hypersensitivity
In this reaction, the individual is sensitized to produce
antibody that attaches to the surface of a target cell and
subsequently activates the classical pathway of the complement system. The deposition of complement molecules
onto the target cell surface leads to destruction of that target via either formation of the membrane attack complex
of complement with osmotic lysis of the cell or phagocytosis of the immunoglobulin and complement opsonized
target (Figure 22.9). The classical target cell for this type of
reaction is the erythrocyte, and type II hypersensitivity is
the immunopathogenic mechanism that underlies diseases
such as immune-mediated haemolytic anemia (IMHA)
or blood transfusion reactions. Also included in this category are disorders involving the interaction of antibody
with receptor molecules, classically causing either receptor
blockade (e.g. antibody to the neuromuscular acetylcholine
receptor [AChR] in myasthenia gravis) or receptor activation (e.g. stimulation of the thyroid stimulating hormone
receptor by antibody in human Grave’s disease).

Type III (immune complex) hypersensitivity
This immunopathogenic mechanism has two distinct
subtypes defined by the relative proportions of antigen and antibody involved in the reaction. In antibody
excess type III hypersensitivity, the individual is sensitized to mount a marked antibody response to antigen.
On re-exposure to that antigen, the high concentrations
of antibody that may be found at the site of antigen entry
immediately bind to the antigen at the site of exposure.

K22463_C022.indd 991

The antigen–antibody interaction results in local formation of insoluble immune complexes, with subsequent
activation of complement and production of inflammatory mediators and local recruitment of inflammatory cells. The classical example of such a reaction is the
human ‘Arthus reaction’ involving exposure to inhaled
antigens (of an occupational nature), with the development of pulmonary disease post exposure in a sensitized
individual. Such reactions are rarely documented in the
dog and cat.
In antigen excess type III hypersensitivity there are
higher concentrations of antigen than antibody, resulting in the formation of small, soluble immune complexes
that circulate in the bloodstream. Depending on the
nature of the antigen and antibody involved and vascular factors (e.g. endothelial damage, turbulent flow), these
complexes may become lodged in the walls of small capillaries in predilection sites such as the renal glomerulus,
synovium, uveal tract, and cutaneous basement membrane zone. The ensuing local inflammation (vasculitis)
may lead to thrombosis and ischemic necrosis of the tissue supplied by the vessel (Figure 22.10). This form of
type III reaction is not uncommon in dogs and cats and,
although the inciting antigens are rarely identified, they
are often presumed to be of infectious origin and such
type III reactions to be post-infectious immune sequelae.
A classical example of such a reaction is immune complex
glomerulonephritis secondary to Leishmania or Borrelia

25/04/16 11:25 am

992

Multisystemic disorders

22.10

22.11

Figure 22.10 Cutaneous vasculitis in a dog. This is one of
multiple affected dermal blood vessels in biopsy samples
taken from ulcerative lesions on the flanks and scrotum of an
11-year-old dog. There is deposition of fibrin in the remains
of the wall of this vessel, together with numerous apoptotic
neutrophils within the wall and within the surrounding dermal
collagen. The cause of this presumptive type III hypersensitivity
reaction was not ascertained.

Figure 22.11 Section of kidney from a dog with leishmaniasis.
There is mononuclear cell infiltration of the interstitium, with
distortion and inflammation of the glomerular tuft. Arterial
vessels in this section had clear evidence of leukocytoclastic
vasculitis. The pathogenesis of these lesions likely involves the
deposition of immune complexes containing IgG antibody and
Leishmania antigen.

infection in the dog (Figure 22.11). Such reactions are
also likely to have a role in diseases such as cutaneous
lupus erythematosus (CLE), immune-mediated polyarthritis, and immune-mediated uveitis.

Antigen
Memory
cell

Type IV (delayed) hypersensitivity
This hypersensitivity reaction involves cellular rather
than humoral immunopathologic mechanisms. The
response to local tissue re-exposure to antigen in a sensitized individual is the activation of memory T cells,
with the recruitment of mononuclear cells (chiefly macrophages, CD4+, and CD8+ T cells) into the site of antigenic
exposure via activation of endothelia that permits this
site-specific migration. Local tissue damage is mediated
by the infiltrating cells and the cytokines that they produce (Figure 22.12). The activation of T-cell memory and
recruitment of mononuclear cells takes some time to
occur (classically 72 hours), leading to the description of
this reaction as ‘delayed type hypersensitivity’. This type
of immunopathologic mechanism is the classical manifestation of a protective Th1 response to a range of tissue
pathogens but, when used inappropriately, it forms the
basis of the contact hypersensitivity reaction or autoimmune reactions involving cellular infiltration (e.g.
immune-mediated polyarthritis, lymphocytic thyroiditis,
granulomatous meningoencephalitis).

IMMUNE-MEDIATED DISEASES
Immune-mediated diseases arise when the range of
immunologic mechanisms described above are activated

K22463_C022.indd 992

Vascular
endothelium

22.12

IFN-γ

Th1
IFN-γ
Macrophage
Dendritic
cell

CD8

Th1
IFN-γ

IFN-γ

IL-1
IL-6
TNF-α

Inflammation

Figure 22.12 In type IV hypersensitivity, re-exposure to the
sensitizing antigen leads to local activation of memory Th1
cells. These secrete IFN-γ, which activates vascular endothelium
and permits recruitment of further T cells (Th1 and CD8+) and
macrophages. These in turn secrete further cytokines, which
mediate the local inflammatory reaction.

inappropriately to produce tissue pathology and clinical signs. This is clearly the case in the range of allergic
diseases where there is an inappropriate and excessive
immune response (involving combinations of type
I and IV reactions) to allergens (e.g. aeroallergens,
­arthropod-derived allergens) to which a clinically normal individual might be exposed but fail to respond. The
allergic diseases are of immense clinical significance in
both human and veterinary medicine, and consequently
are widely researched and relatively well characterized
in terms of their immunopathogenesis.

25/04/16 11:25 am

Immunologic disorders

ALLERGIC DISEASES
There are clear genetic predispositions to the development of allergy in human families and breeds and
­pedigrees of dog, yet the genetic basis of allergy is not
well characterized. Several genome-wide association
studies searching for single nucleotide polymorphisms in
genes that might be associated with canine atopic dermatitis have produced conflicting data. Whatever the genetic
basis, it is clear that some individuals (human and canine)
have a predisposition to make high IgE responses to ubiquitous environmental allergens. Such individuals also
have reduced effectiveness of immunoregulation, and the
allergic state correlates with lack of induced regulatory
T cell function (e.g. IL-10-producing Tregs). In addition to
genetic and immunologic factors, there are clear environmental influences over the development of allergic disease. This may be as simple as environmental exposure,
and reduction of exposure levels to causative allergens
is one part of the clinical management of such disorders.
In human medicine, much research has focused on the
‘hygiene hypothesis’, which links the high incidence of
juvenile allergy and autoimmune disease to lack of exposure to infectious microbes and intestinal parasites in
early childhood. Such exposure to infectious agents, particularly those present at the intestinal mucosa, is critical
for generating Tregs.

AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES
The second major group of immune-mediated d
­ isorders
are the autoimmune diseases. These too involve an
inappropriate and excessive induction of type II,
­
type III, or type IV hypersensitivity to self-antigens
(autoantigens) in the presence of reduced effective­
ness of natural Tregs, which would normally prevent
such reactions. Clinically normal humans and animals
(including dogs) harbor, as part of their lymphocyte repertoire, T and B cells bearing receptors able to recognize
self-antigens. These a
­ utoreactive cells are normally kept
in check by a range of immunoregulatory mechanisms,
including:

●● Deletion of autoreactive T cells as part of intrathymic

●●
●●

●●
●●

development or within the body tissues after thymic
emigration.
Exposure to autoantigen but failure to activate
(anergy).
Failure to expose to autoantigen by lack of antigen
presentation or physical sequestration of antigen
(immunologic ignorance).
The activity of natural Tregs.
Failing to provide autoreactive B cells with T-cell help.

K22463_C022.indd 993

993

When these control mechanisms fail (leading to loss
of immunologic tolerance to autoantigens), an autoimmune reaction with tissue pathology and clinical signs
may arise.
As for allergic disease, there is a clear genetic predisposition to autoimmunity in dogs, but such predispositions (for allergic or autoimmune disease) are not
well-recognized in feline medicine. The strongest genetic
linkages are with specific allotypic variants of the genes
encoding MHC molecules. Associations with class II MHC
gene haplotypes are now described for a range of canine
autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis,
IMHA, lymphocytic thyroiditis, hypoadrenocorticism,
necrotizing meningoencephalitis, diabetes mellitus, and
breed-associated chronic hepatitis.
While it was once considered that autoimmunity
involved a spontaneously arising immunologic defect in
a genetically predisposed individual, there is now recognition that autoimmune diseases have many defined
predisposing and trigger factors. Predisposing factors
include age (autoimmunity is generally a phenomenon of
middle to old age), gender, and lifestyle (e.g. stress, exercise, diet). A recent study has shown that neutered dogs
are more likely to die from immune-mediated diseases.
Trigger factors are largely environmental and include
exposure to drugs, vaccines, and infectious agents. In
fact, most autoimmune disease is now considered to be
a post-infectious phenomenon and in humans, the active
infection may precede onset of the autoimmune disease
by months or years. Finally, other chronic disease states
(particularly neoplasia or chronic inflammatory disease)
may sufficiently disturb immune homeostasis to result in
secondary autoimmunity.
This growing concept of recognized trigger factors for autoimmune disease has reshaped the way in
which we think about these disorders in companion
animal medicine. One example of this changing trend
has been the impact of molecular diagnostic methodology for the range of arthropod-transmitted infectious agents that are ­generally unculturable and may
remain ­
cryptic within an infected animal (‘stealth
pathogens’). The use of molecular diagnostics increasingly allows us to ­
attribute ­
‘idiopathic’ disease to an
infectious agent, and modify management protocols
accordingly.

PRIMARY IMMUNODEFICIENCY DISORDERS
The third category of immune-mediated diseases includes
the primary immunodeficiency disorders. Instead of
being an inappropriate excess of immunity (as in allergy
or autoimmunity) this is the reverse scenario, which
means that there is an inability to mount a protective

25/04/16 11:25 am

994

Multisystemic disorders

immune response due to a congenital, inherited genetic
mutation in a gene encoding a key immunologic molecule.
Such defects may occur at different levels of immunologic
development and consequently lead to clinical disease of
varying severity. For example, some defects mean that
the animal fails to develop adequate T and B lymphocytes (e.g. X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency;
X-SCID), with severely impaired immunity and death
during early life. By contrast, a more subtle immunodeficiency (e.g. selective IgA deficiency) may not lead to clinical disease or produce only mild changes. A wide range
of primary immunodeficiency disorders is documented
in humans and for many the precise genetic mutation is
known. A similarly wide range of disorders is suggested
to have an immunodeficiency basis in numerous breeds
of dog, but only a few of these have been defined at the
molecular level. Thus, many of this group of canine diseases should only be considered putative immunodeficiencies at this time. Of note is the fascinating dichotomy
between cat and dog in this regard; primary immunodeficiency is extremely rare in the cat, with only a handful
of reported cases.

IMMUNE SYSTEM NEOPLASIA
The final group of immunologic disorders comprises those
of immune system neoplasia. Although not classically an
‘immune-mediated’ pathology, these tumors are clear
manifestations of an abnormal immune system and can
impair the remaining immune function of an animal, thus
leading to immunocompromise. These disorders include
lymphoma, lymphoid leukemia, plasmacytoma, and multiple myeloma, and arguably might also include neoplasia
affecting adjunct immune cells such as dendritic cells (the
range of histiocytic neoplasia) and mast cells. There are
many gaps in our knowledge of the factors that underlie
the development of this range of tumors. In cats, retroviral infection has a role, although these diseases still occur
in geographical areas with a low prevalence of feline
leukemia virus infection or where vaccination and testing programs have reduced the prevalence of infection.
There are some well-­documented genetic associations for
canine lymphoma (e.g. Boxer) and histiocytic neoplasia
(e.g. Bernese Mountain Dog, Flat-coated Retriever) and
limited epidemiological studies have suggested a role for
various environmental carcinogens (e.g. cigarette smoke
and feline lymphoma, pesticides and radiation for canine
lymphoma).
Although these disorders may be considered as individual entities, there is some linkage between them, as
they are all manifestations of disturbed immune system homeostasis. It is possible for more than one type of

K22463_C022.indd 994

immunologic abnormality to exist in any one patient at
any one time, and a number of such associations are recognized, including:

●● Thymoma and myasthenia gravis.
●● IgA deficiency and autoimmunity.
●● Inflammatory bowel disease and immune-mediated
thrombocytopenia (IMTP) or IMHA.

●● Lymphoma or leukemia and IMHA.
Similarly, different types of autoimmune disease may be
recognized concurrently (e.g. combinations of IMHA, IMTP,
and immune-mediated neutropenia; IMNP) or may present as multisystemic autoimmune disease (e.g. ­systemic
lupus erythematosus, SLE).

LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS OF ­
IMMUNE-MEDIATED DISEASE
Allergic disease
Key to the diagnosis and management of allergic disease
is identification of the causative allergen. This may be
addressed through obtaining a detailed exposure history
or by determining whether there is clinical improvement following dietary trial, parasiticidal treatment,
or following removal of the animal from the normal
environment. For aeroallergens and arthropod-derived
allergens (e.g. flea saliva), the generally accepted ‘gold
standard’ diagnostic procedure remains the intradermal test, and some experimental studies have described
efficacy of patch testing for demonstration of late-phase
responses. Intradermal or percutaneous challenge has
not proven reproducible for the diagnosis of food allergy.
The use of serologic testing has increased, and many specialists now use these tests in parallel with traditional
methodology.
Serologic tests are designed to demonstrate the
­presence of circulating allergen-specific IgE and/or IgG
antibodies. Such tests are almost all based on the ELISA,
but vary in the technology used for immunoglobulin
detection. Most involve coating test allergens onto the
plastic wells of the plate and subsequent incubation
with patient serum and then an enzyme-linked detecting reagent (Figure 22.13). The most novel detection
technology involves the application of a recombinant
version of the IgE Fc receptor molecule. Serologic testing
can be informative, but it does not necessarily correlate
with intradermal test results, which measure cutaneous
mast cell-bound IgE (rather than free antibody in the
circulation).
At the research level (but not clinically available), tests
such as in-vitro mast cell degranulation, blood lymphocyte

25/04/16 11:25 am

Immunologic disorders

Substrate

S

S

S

E

E

E

A

22.13

B

995

22.14

FcεR-enzyme
Antiglobulin

Pre-incubation
Patient IgE

Allergen

Postincubation

Top view

Figure 22.13 Serologic testing for allergen-specific IgE
antibody. The wells of a microtitration plate are coated with
allergen and subsequently incubated with patient serum.
Serum allergen-specific IgE binds to the target and this
interaction is visualized by the detection reagent (recombinant
Fcε receptor conjugated to alkaline phosphatase) and enzyme
substrate.

allergen stimulation (with measurement of cytokine gene
transcription), and western blotting for fine definition of
the serologic response, have been employed.

Autoimmune disease
The aim of immunodiagnostic testing in autoimmunity
is to confirm an autoimmune pathogenesis by demonstrating circulating or cell- or tissue-bound antibody
(and/or complement) relevant to the clinical presentation of the animal. Although a number of autoimmune
diseases involve cell-mediated immunopathogenesis, it
is not possible at present routinely to investigate these
aspects of clinical disease. The key to logical application
of these tests is to become familiar with the purpose and
limitations of each. For example, there is little rationale
in selecting a Coombs test to support the diagnosis of a
dog with putative immune-mediated polyarthritis unless
that animal is concurrently anemic.

Coombs test
The most widely available immunodiagnostic test for
autoimmunity is the Coombs test. This is indicated to support the diagnosis of IMHA in an animal with appropriate clinical and hematologic features. The aim of the test
is to demonstrate the presence of IgG/IgM/complement
C3b on the surface of patient erythrocytes as presumptive evidence that these immunoreactants are involved in
the hemolytic reaction (Figure 22.14). There are numerous reasons for false-positive and false-negative Coombs
tests, but the most common reason for the latter is that a
complete test has not been performed. Many commercial
laboratories offer a simple Coombs test using only a polyvalent Coombs reagent, with minimal titration at a ­single

K22463_C022.indd 995

Button

Mat

Figure 22.14 Coombs test. Wells A and B of a microtiter plate
contain a suspension of washed erythrocytes from an animal
with IMHA. The patient red cells are coated with antibody in
vivo. An antiglobulin reagent (e.g. one of polyvalent canine
Coombs reagent, anti-dog IgG, anti-dog IgM, or anti-dog
complement C3) is added to well B only. After a period of
incubation the wells are examined for gross evidence of
agglutination. In well B, the antiglobulin has cross-linked Ig
molecules on the patient erythrocytes to form a lattice-like
structure that appears as a diffuse mat of red cells that covers
the base of the well (agglutination). In well A, no antiglobulin
has been added, so the erythrocytes settle to the base of the
well by gravity, forming a tight ‘button’ of packed red cells. In
a complete Coombs test, the different antiglobulin reagents
would be fully titrated and the test performed in duplicate at
both 4° and 37°C.

incubation temperature. A full Coombs test (which is
more likely to provide a positive result) should use a combination of polyvalent and specific antisera (for IgG, IgM,
and complement C3) that are fully titrated in a microtiter
system at both 4o and 37oC. An alternative approach to
diagnosis using flow cytometry to detect red cell-bound
antibodies is not widely available.

Antiplatelet and antineutrophil antibody detection
The detection of antiplatelet antibody in IMTP or
­antineutrophil antibody in IMNP is rarely available outside of specialist laboratories. A range of approaches to
the detection of platelet-bound Ig has been attempted
including immunofluorescence, ELISA-based, and
radioimmunoassay-based tests. The most sensitive
­
modality has proven to be flow cytometric detection
using fluorochrome-labeled antibodies, but this is not
widely available. Older test methodologies, such as the
platelet factor 3 test and megakaryocyte immunofluorescence, can no longer be recommended. One limitation of
direct testing for platelet-bound Ig is the fact that thrombocytopenic animals are often so markedly thrombocytopenic that it is difficult to harvest sufficient cells for

25/04/16 11:49 am

996

Multisystemic disorders

analysis. IMNP has only recently been well-documented
as a disease and although flow cytometric testing is feasible, availability is limited.

Serum antinuclear antibody detection
The detection of serum antinuclear antibody (ANA) is
widely available. The most commonly employed test
involves the layering of diluted patient serum onto
substrates of nucleated cells grown in monolayers on a
sectored microscope slide. ANA bound to the nucleus is
subsequently detected by use of an anti-IgG reagent coupled to a fluorochrome or enzyme (Figures 22.15, 22.16).
The test is read by microscopic examination for the pattern of nuclear labeling and determination of the titer.
Classically, the ANA test is used to support the diagnosis
of SLE, but it may also be present in animals with other
autoimmune diseases. The key to interpretation is the
titer, as many clinically normal animals and animals with
chronic inflammatory, infectious, or neoplastic disease
may have low-titered ANA as a reflection of cell turnover.

Rheumatoid factor tests
Serum or synovial fluid rheumatoid factor (RF) may be
tested in order to support a diagnosis of i­ mmune-mediated
polyarthritis. Ideally, both RF and ANA would be
requested in such patients as either autoantibody may
be present, despite the fact that RF is classically reported
to be associated with erosive rheumatoid arthritis. RF
is an IgM (or rarely IgA) autoantibody with specificity for
an IgG molecule that in turn is bound to an undefined
­antigen (Figure 22.17). RF may have a role in the pathogenesis of polyarthritis, and is thought to be formed in

22.15

UV light

the synovium and leak into the circulating blood. RF may
be detected by ELISA, in which target IgG is coated to the
wells of a microtitration tray, or via the Rose Waller test
in which the target IgG is affixed to the surface of erythrocytes and the RF causes cross-linking of target IgG and
therefore agglutination of these cells.

Other autoantibody tests
Other commonly used autoantibody tests include those
for thyroglobulin autoantibodies in dogs with hypothyroidism attributed to lymphocytic thyroiditis, and for
AChR autoantibodies in dogs with putative myasthenia
gravis. Thyroglobulin autoantibody testing is widely
available, but only one laboratory internationally offers
the AChR autoantibody test.

Immunohistochemistry
For some autoimmune diseases (e.g. autoimmune skin
disease, immune complex glomerulonephritis), immunohistochemistry or immunofluorescence testing has been
employed in order to demonstrate the presence of immunoglobulin and/or complement within lesional tissue
(Figure 22.18). Such testing is not particularly sensitive,
but it can be helpful in supporting a diagnosis where histopathology is equivocal.

Immunodeficiency disease
The diagnosis of immunodeficiency disease is one of
the great frustrations of clinical veterinary medicine.
At the research level, it has proven possible to assess
the competence of all aspects of the immune system
(i.e. immunoglobulin, complement, phagocytic cell and

22.16

Fluorochrome
Antiserum

Serum ANA
Nucleated
cell
monolayer

Figures 22.15, 22.16 The antinuclear antibody (ANA) assay. (22.15) Serial dilutions of patient serum are incubated with a source of
nucleated cells to permit any ANA to bind to target antigens. Binding is visualized by subsequent incubation with an antiserum
coupled to either a fluorochrome (for examination under UV light) or an enzyme (for reaction with substrate for light microscopic
examination). (22.16) Positive ANA reaction as shown by immunoperoxidase labeling of nuclei within the target cell line.

K22463_C022.indd 996

25/04/16 11:25 am

Immunologic disorders

Antigen

22.17

Substrate

S

Target IgG

S

S

E

E

E

E
Detecting
antibody

Leukocyte
recruitment

Inflammation

Figure 22.17 Rheumatoid factor (RF). An undefined synovial
antigen is complexed with an IgG antibody, which in turn forms
the target for the IgM RF. Binding of RF leads to activation
of the classical pathway of complement and subsequent
recruitment of leukocytes. RF may thus have a role in the
pathogenesis of polyarthritis in addition to being a useful
serologic marker of disease.

lymphocyte function, cytokine production), but such
testing is not available commercially. Consequently,
the diagnosis of primary immunodeficiency largely
relies on simple m
­ easures of immune system assessment (e.g. hematology, serum protein electrophoresis,
lymphoid tissue histopathology) together with characterization of any secondary infection. The only readily
available immunodiagnostic test is determination of
serum immunoglobulin concentration by single radial
immunodiffusion (SRID) (Figure 22.19). For the dog, the
serum concentrations of IgG, IgM, and IgA can be determined, but there are few reference ranges for animals of
different age and breed. Specialist laboratories that have
flow cytometry may offer blood lymphocyte phenotyping, generally to determine the relative proportions of
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and CD21+ B cells amongst the circulating lymphoid population. These percentages should be
related back to absolute lymphocyte number (as for a differential leukocyte count). At present there is relatively
sparse information about how such changes correlate
with disease, but marked decreases might be predicted in
some immunodeficiency states. Finally, for a limited number of canine immunodeficiencies, molecular diagnostic
tests have been developed after elucidation of the genetic
mutation underlying the disease. These include tests for
X-SCID, canine leukocyte adhesion deficiency (CLAD), the
trapped neutrophil syndrome in Border Collies, and cyclic
hematopoiesis in the gray Collie dog.

K22463_C022.indd 997

22.18

S

Tissue-bound
immune complex

IgM RF

Complement
activation

997

Figure 22.18 Immunohistochemistry. The microscope slide
displays a section of kidney with suspected immune complexes
localized to the glomerular capillaries. The immunoglobulin
component of these complexes is detected by overlaying the
section with an enzyme-linked antiserum (e.g. anti-dog IgG).
On application of the appropriate substrate, there is a color
change at the site of antibody binding, confirming the presence
of immune complex.

22.19

Load
standards
and test

Gel contains
antiserum

Protein
concentration
S1

S2

S3

S4

T

Well cut in gel

S4

After incubation

S1

S2

S3

Test

Ring diameter

Precipitin ring
S1

S2

S3

S4

T

Figure 22.19 Single radial immunodiffusion. This test is
used to determine the concentration of immunoglobulin
in patient serum. An agarose gel is poured within which is
mixed an antiserum (e.g. anti-dog IgG). Wells are cut into the
gel and loaded with a precise volume of standards of known
concentration and the patient sample. During an overnight
incubation, IgG diffuses from the wells into the gel matrix
where it encounters antiserum that precipitates the IgG. The
higher the concentration of IgG, the larger the diameter of the
precipitin ring obtained. A standard curve derived from the four
samples of known value is used to determine the concentration
in the test sample.

25/04/16 11:25 am

998

Multisystemic disorders

Immune system neoplasia
The front line for diagnosis of immune system neoplasia
is clinical and imaging examination, hematology and
bone marrow analysis, cytology, and biopsy. In recent
years there has been wide uptake of tissue immunohistochemistry for confirmation of the phenotype of round
cell neoplasia. Following routine light microscopic
diagnosis, most pathology laboratories are able to
apply antisera in order to determine whether the neoplasm is of T cell, B cell, or histiocytic origin (Figures
22.20, 22.21). In similar fashion, some laboratories offer
immunocytochemical or flow cytometric testing of cellular suspensions derived from a fine-needle aspirate,
22.20

which provides a similar (but more rapid) outcome.
Flow cytometric testing has also become available
for the determination of the nature of leukemia, and
a range of lymphoid and myeloid markers are generally employed to phenotype such neoplastic populations. The most recent advance in this area of diagnosis
has been the development of ‘clonality testing’. This
molecular test can determine whether a population of
lymphoid cells is clonal (and therefore neoplastic) by
examining restriction in rearrangements in TCR and
BCR genes. Such testing is of particular benefit in distinguishing between a reactive and a neoplastic lymphoid
infiltration (for example in the intestinal mucosa) or for
monitoring the presence of residual neoplastic cells in
blood or tissue throughout chemotherapy. These new
22.22

Load serum to
well in gel

Monoclonal γ globulin

Albumin
Electrophoretically
separate proteins

Globulins

β

α

22.21
Cut parallel trough
and load antiserum

Precipitin identifies
paraprotein

Figures 22.20, 22.21 Lymphoma immunophenotyping.
Section of skin from a dog with dermal lymphoma. (22.20)
The H&E-stained section reveals a closely packed population
of blastic cells with a vesicular, cleaved nucleus, with central
prominent nucleolus and minimal cytoplasm. (22.21)
Immunolabeling with anti-CD79a reveals this to be a B-cell
lymphoma.

K22463_C022.indd 998

Figure 22.22 Immunoelectrophoresis. Serum from a patient with
suspected paraproteinemia is separated electrophoretically in a
gel matrix. Following this, a trough is cut into the gel parallel to
the separated proteins and loaded with antiserum (e.g. anti-dog
IgG γ heavy chain). During a period of incubation, the antiserum
diffuses from the trough to react specifically with the paraprotein
and form an arc of precipitation. The position of this arc relative
to that produced with normal serum immunoglobulin indicates
that the paraprotein carries altered charge and is thus structurally
altered.

25/04/16 11:25 am

Immunologic disorders

diagnostic approaches to tumor classification have
helped to refine prognosis for canine lymphoma. Two
recent studies have shown the longest median survival
time (or event-free survival time) for low-grade T-cell
lymphoma, the shortest survival time for high-grade
T-cell lymphoma, and intermediate survival for dogs
with B-cell lymphoma.
Multiple myeloma is characterized in part by serum
paraproteinemia, resulting in a monoclonal gammopathy identified by serum protein electrophoresis. The
immunodiagnostic work-up in this disease entails more
detailed analysis of this paraprotein. The traditional
means of achieving this is via immunoelectrophoresis
(Figure 22.22) in which the identity of the paraprotein
(class of Ig) is determined together with demonstration
of altered electrophoretic mobility confirming the abnormal physicochemical properties of the molecule. Similar
information can be derived from immunofixation or
western blotting studies, although in reality, typing of
paraprotein is not routinely performed in cases satisfying the diagnostic criteria for this disease.

MAJOR IMMUNE-MEDIATED DISEASES
This section will review the major immune-mediated
disorders of companion animals. Where these are
described elsewhere in this book by body system, a
cross-reference to the appropriate chapter will be given.
Significant features of diseases that are not discussed
elsewhere will be described in this chapter; however,
this list is not exhaustive, and less common entities are
not included.

allergic rhinitis
See Chapter 4: Respiratory disorders.

feline asthma
See Chapter 4: Respiratory disorders.

canine eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy
See Chapter 4: Respiratory disorders.

allergic conjunctivitis
Definition/overview
Allergic conjunctivitis may occur as a distinct entity or
in conjunction with cutaneous allergy. The likely mechanism is type I hypersensitivity.

Clinical presentation
The clinical features include conjunctival erythema and
edema, pruritus, and ocular discharge. There may be secondary bacterial infection, and blepharitis and k
­ eratitis
may also occur. Conjunctival lymphoid f­
ollicular
­hyperplasia may be visible grossly or on biopsy.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis may involve cytologic examination (eosinophils and mast cells may be expected) and the investigation of concurrent cutaneous hypersensitivity.

contact hypersensitivity

ALLERGIC DISEASES

See Chapter 18: Dermatologic disorders.

atopic dermatitis

AUTOIMMUNE AND IDIOPATHIC
IMMUNE-MEDIATED DISEASES

See Chapter 18: Dermatologic disorders.

999

flea allergy dermatitis

IMMUNE-MEDIATED HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA AND
PURE RED CELL APLASIA

See Chapter 18: Dermatologic disorders.

See Chapter 16: Hematologic disorders.

food allergy

IMMUNE-MEDIATED THROMBOCYTOPENIA

See Chapter 18: Dermatologic disorders, and Chapter 8:
Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum).

See Chapter 16: Hematologic disorders, and Chapter 17:
Disorders of hemostasis.

feline eosinophilic granuloma complex

IMMUNE MEDIATED-NEUTROPENIA

See Chapter 18: Dermatologic disorders.

See Chapter 16: Hematologic disorders.

K22463_C022.indd 999

25/04/16 11:25 am

1000

Multisystemic disorders

RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS

attraction of neutrophils and/or eosinophils into these
spaces to form sterile pustules.

See Chapter 15: Bone and joint disorders.

IMMUNE-MEDIATED POLYARTHRITIS
See Chapter 15: Bone and joint disorders.

PEMPHIGUS FOLIACEUS
(See also Chapter 18: Dermatologic disorders.)

Definition/overview
Pemphigus foliaceus is the most common of the pemphigus disorders that are characterized by the formation
of autoantibody specific for the desmosomal intercellular adhesion molecules that join together the epidermal
keratinocytes. Less common pemphigus variants include
pemphigus vulgaris, pemphigus erythematosus, and
panepidermal pustular pemphigus (pemphigus vegetans).

Pathophysiology
Autoantibody binding leads to physical disruption
of these junctions and local activation of the complement and plasminogen–plasmin pathways. Vesicles
form within the epidermis, and these contain the separated keratinocytes (acanthocytes). There is chemotactic
22.23

Figure 22.23 Skin biopsy from a 10-year-old Collie-cross dog
with a generalized pustular and crusting dermatosis. There
is a large, intact subcorneal pustule filled by nondegenerate
neutrophils and acanthocytes (arrows). These features are
consistent with pemphigus foliaceus.

K22463_C022.indd 1000

Clinical presentation
Classically, in pemphigus foliaceus the pustules are subcorneal in location, which is likely related to the distribution of the target autoantigen (Figure 22.23). Direct
immunohistochemistry may be used to demonstrate
the intercellular deposition of immunoglobulin and/or
complement (Figure 22.24). Clinically, intact vesicles
or pustules are rarely observed and the predominant
lesion is of crusting affecting the face, feet, and trunk.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by skin biopsy.

Management
Treatment involves immunosuppressive doses of oral
glucocorticoid.

BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
Definition/overview
Bullous pemphigoid is an autoimmune disease in which
autoantibody targets structures within the hemidesmosome that anchors the basal keratinocytes into the basement membrane zone between epidermis and dermis.
22.24

Figure 22.24 Skin biopsy from a 9-year-old German Shepherd
Dog with pemphigus foliaceus confirmed histologically. This
biopsy is labeled to detect IgG, which is present associated with
the desmosomes of the mid to superficial level keratinocytes.
Note there is no intercellular deposition associated with the
basal cells.

25/04/16 11:25 am

Immunologic disorders

Bullous pemphigoid variants include epidermolysis
bullosa acquisita, linear IgA bullous disease, and mucous
membrane pemphigoid.

Pathophysiology
Disruption of this adhesion results in separation of the
epidermis from the dermis, with formation of a cleft lined
by the basal keratinocytes (uppermost) and basement
membrane (lowermost). This space may become filled
with fluid and/or inflammatory cells.

1001

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by skin biopsy and immunohistochemistry may be used to demonstrate the local deposition of
immunoreactant (Figure 22.26).
22.25

Clinical presentation
Clinically, the bullous lesions are often disrupted and the
presentation is of ulceration that particularly affects the
oral mucocutaneous junctions, axilla, groin, and footpads.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by biopsy and immunohistochemistry may be
used to demonstrate the deposition of immunoglobulin/
complement within the basement membrane zone.

Management
Treatment is by immunosuppression, and adjunct immunosuppression may be required in addition to oral
glucocorticoid.

CUTANEOUS LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
(See also Chapter 18: Dermatologic disorders.)

Definition/overview
CLE is the name given to a group of immune-mediated
skin diseases with a common pathogenesis. The prototype
disorder of this group is discoid lupus erythematosus,
which is now termed ‘nasal planum CLE’. Other diseases
within the CLE group include oral cavity or mucocutaneous CLE, generalized CLE, vesicular CLE of Collies and
Shelties, exfoliative CLE of German Shorthaired Pointers,
and lupoid onychodystrophy.

Figure 22.25 Skin biopsy from a 16-year-old German Shepherd
Dog with depigmentation and loss of ‘cobblestone’ pattern
to the nasal planum. There is a lymphoplasmacytic interface
dermatitis with prominence of the basement membrane
and mild hydropic degeneration of the basal keratinocyte
layer. The other key feature of ‘nasal planum cutaneous
lupus erythematosus’ not present in this field is individual
keratinocyte apoptosis at higher levels.
22.26

Pathophysiology
CLE has a complex pathogenesis, which in part involves
infiltration of the basement membrane and epidermis by lymphocytes (‘interface dermatitis’) that target
and destroy individual keratinocytes by induction of
apoptosis (Figure 22.25). Additionally, there is deposition of immunoglobulin/complement at the basement
membrane zone, although this may be an ‘epiphenomenon’ rather than having a direct role in pathogenesis.
Exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light is thought to play a role
in the triggering of this disease.

K22463_C022.indd 1001

Figure 22.26 Skin biopsy from an 8-year-old male Norfolk
Terrier with histopathologic evidence of interface dermatitis.
The slide is immunolabeled to demonstrate the presence of
IgG. There is a linear deposit of this immunoglobulin at the
basement membrane zone between epidermis and dermis, and
the cytoplasm of IgG+ plasma cells within the dermal infiltrate
is also labeled.

25/04/16 11:25 am

1002

Multisystemic disorders

Management
A range of therapeutic options is proposed, most commonly involving the use of combination tetracycline
(doxycycline) and niacinamide, topical glucocorticoid, or
oral glucocorticoid at anti-inflammatory (rarely immunosuppressive) doses.

apoptosis in small groups of keratinocytes (EM), through
to full-­thickness epidermal necrosis and ulceration (TEN)
(Figure 22.27).

Clinical presentation

This immune-mediated disorder primarily occurs in
Collies and Shelties and is inherited as autosomally dominant with variable expression.

Lesions may be localized or generalized and affect cutaneous and/or mucocutaneous surfaces. The lesions of EM
are relatively mild erythematous macules, papules, or
confluent plaques, which may regress spontaneously following removal of the trigger. By contrast, TEN is a severe
disease due to loss of fluid, electrolytes, and colloid from
the ulcerated lesions, with high potential for secondary
bacterial infection.

Pathophysiology

Management

The pathogenesis is poorly defined, but is thought to
involve immune complex deposition, as elevation in circulating immune complexes is documented before the
onset of clinical signs. UV light and estrus are suggested
trigger factors.

Standard immunosuppressive glucocorticoid regimes are
often ineffectual in these diseases, but IV administration
of human immunoglobulin has proven beneficial.

Clinical presentation

Definition/overview

This disease affects young dogs (under 6 months of age).
They develop alopecic, erythematous, scaling, crusting,
or ulcerative lesions that target the face, oral mucocutaneous junctions, pinnae, limbs, footpads, and tail tip.
Concurrent muscular involvement particularly affects
facial and limb muscle groups and these have inflammation and atrophy on biopsy and display electromyographic abnormalities. Megaesophagus may also occur.
The outcome is variable; some dogs may show spontaneous resolution of disease, in others it may be cyclical,
and in others progressive.

Pannus (chronic superficial keratitis/keratoconjunctivitis) is a putative immune-mediated disorder of the cornea
that particularly affects German Shepherd Dogs and may
be triggered by UV light exposure.

DERMATOMYOSITIS
Definition/overview

PANNUS

22.27

Management
Treatment options include immunosuppressive oral glucocorticoids, vitamin E, and pentoxifylline.

ERYTHEMA MULTIFORME/TOXIC EPIDERMAL
NECROLYSIS
Definition/overview
These disorders are found at each end of a spectrum of
entities defined on the basis of their severity: erythema
multiforme (EM) minor, EM major, Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS), SJS–toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) overlap
syndrome, and TEN.

Pathophysiology
These diseases may be triggered by drug administration or infection and involve an interface inflammatory infiltration of lymphocytes that induce cytotoxic

K22463_C022.indd 1002

Figure 22.27 Skin biopsy from a 10-year-old West Highland
White Terrier with severe, generalized crusting dermatosis.
There is interface dermatitis with clusters of apoptotic
keratinocytes within the epidermis associated with the
infiltrating lymphocytes (‘satellitosis’). These features are
consistent with erythema multiforme.

25/04/16 11:25 am

Immunologic disorders

1003

Pathophysiology

POLYMYOSITIS

There is lymphocytic infiltration, vascularization, and
fibrosis of the superficial corneal stroma, which extends
from the limbus.

See Chapter 14: Disorders of the nervous system and
muscle.

Management
Application of topical cyclosporine has proven efficacious
in management of this disease.

KERATOCONJUNCTIVITIS SICCA/SJÖGREN’S
SYNDROME
See Chapter 19: Ocular manifestations of systemic
diseases.

UVEODERMATOLOGIC SYNDROME
See Chapter 19: Ocular manifestations of systemic
diseases.

IDIOPATHIC UVEITIS
See Chapter 19: Ocular manifestations of systemic
diseases.

LYMPHOCYTIC THYROIDITIS
See Chapter 11: Endocrine disorders.

DIABETES MELLITUS

MASTICATORY MUSCLE MYOSITIS/­
EXTRAOCULAR MUSCLE MYOSITIS
See Chapter 14: Disorders of the nervous system and
muscle.

GRANULOMATOUS MENINGOENCEPHALITIS
See Chapter 14: Disorders of the nervous system and muscle, and Chapter 19: Ocular manifestations of systemic
diseases.

STEROID-RESPONSIVE MENINGITIS ARTERITIS
See Chapter 14: Disorders of the nervous system and
muscle.

SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
Definition/overview
SLE is a rare disease of the dog and even less common in
the cat. SLE is the prototype multisystemic autoimmune
disease and is defined by strict diagnostic criteria. The
simplest of these criteria are:

●● The animal must show multisystemic disease involvSee Chapter 11: Endocrine disorders.

INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
See Chapter 8: Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum).

ANTIBIOTIC-RESPONSIVE DIARRHEA

ing at least two distinct body systems.

●● The disease affecting these body systems must be
compatible with an immune-mediated process and
laboratory evidence of an immunologic pathogenesis
for these changes must be obtained.
●● The animal must have a high-titered serum ANA.

EXOCRINE PANCREATIC INSUFFICIENCY

Although these criteria are simple, they are generally
very difficult to satisfy; therefore, in many cases a diagnosis of an ‘SLE-overlap’ syndrome (with partial fulfilment of the criteria) is made.

See Chapter 10: Pancreatic disorders.

Pathophysiology

See Chapter 8: Digestive diseases (pharynx to anorectum).

IMMUNE COMPLEX GLOMERULONEPHRITIS
See Chapter 12: Nephrology/urology.

MYASTHENIA GRAVIS
See Chapter 14: Disorders of the nervous system and muscle.

K22463_C022.indd 1003

The most common clinicopathologic manifestations of
canine SLE include IMHA, IMTP, immune complex glomerulonephritis, polyarthritis, and immune-mediated
skin disease. In endemic areas it is important to rule
out arthropod-transmitted infectious disease (particularly leishmaniasis), which can mimic the clinical presentation of SLE. SLE has also been induced by drugs
and may arise secondary to underlying lymphoid or

25/04/16 11:25 am

1004

Multisystemic disorders

myeloid neoplasia. SLE may be inherited and early
research demonstrated that it was possible to establish
breeding lines in which there were dogs with serologic
and clinical abnormalities of autoimmunity (but with
no clear mode of inheritance).

­antibiotic-responsive diarrhea. Dogs have four genetic
variants of IgA, and it is of note that all German Shepherd
Dogs have a restricted genotype that is homozygous for a
single variant.

Diagnosis

Diagnosis of IgA deficiency is not straightforward. In clinical practice the only test that is widely available is SRID
for determination of serum IgA concentration. This test is
insufficiently sensitive to measure the lower IgA concentrations that are found in secretions. IgA deficiency (in
both man and dog) is not a simple genetic mutation in
the gene encoding the α heavy chain. Instead, it is a relative immunodeficiency that in dogs is defined as serum
IgA concentration persistently lower than 0.22 mg/ml.
The serum concentration should be measured on at least
two occasions (at least 1 week apart), as there are both
day-to-day and diurnal variations in canine serum IgA
concentration.

Multiple diagnostic and immunodiagnostic procedures
may be required to support the diagnosis of SLE.

Management
Treatment is generally by immunosuppressive oral glucocorticoid therapy.

PRIMARY IMMUNODEFICIENCY DISEASE
IgA DEFICIENCY
Definition/overview
Selective IgA deficiency is the most commonly reported
canine immunodeficiency disorder and is most often suggested in animals that have chronic, recurrent infectious
disease, most often of the mucocutaneous surfaces.

Etiology/pathophysiology
The spectrum of infectious diseases associated with IgA
deficiency includes pyoderma, demodicosis, rhinitis,
bronchopneumonia, inflammatory bowel disease, and
antibiotic-responsive diarrhea. IgA deficiency has been
definitively documented in the Shar Pei and in one colony
of Beagle dogs. IgA deficiency has been proposed to be
part of the pathogenesis in Irish Wolfhounds with chronic,
recurrent rhinitis–bronchopneumonia syndrome, but
although these dogs have subnormal serum IgA, the concentration of this immunoglobulin in ­bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid is normal to elevated. IgA deficiency has been
suggested to predispose to allergic disease, and there is
evidence that (as for humans) there is an association
with autoimmunity. Some of the IgA deficient Beagle
dogs described above had serum RF, and IgA deficiency
was widespread in a colony of English Cocker Spaniels in
which there was also frequent occurrence of a variety of
autoimmune diseases.
IgA deficiency has been proposed to underlie the
multiple immunologic, infectious, and inflammatory
diseases to which the German Shepherd Dog is predisposed. Although German Shepherd Dogs generally have
normal serum IgA, there is increasing evidence for an
inability to secrete sufficient mucosal IgA in dogs of this
breed, and the IgA deficient phenotype may be particularly associated with inflammatory bowel disease and

K22463_C022.indd 1004

Diagnosis

PUTATIVE IgG DEFICIENCY
Definition/overview
Selective IgG deficiency has recently been reported to
occur in young Cavalier King Charles Spaniels with pneumonia caused by Pneumocystis carinii. Infection with
this opportunist organism is a hallmark of immunodeficiency disease, and is also the clinical presentation of a
putative immunodeficiency disorder affecting Miniature
Dachshunds. These latter dogs may also have subnormal
concentrations of serum IgM and IgA and reduced responsiveness of blood lymphocytes to nonspecific stimulation
with mitogens. In both breeds this is a relatively subtle
immunodeficiency, as affected dogs appear to recover
with appropriate antimicrobial therapy, although pulmonary disease may be recurrent. IgG deficiency is also
the major immunologic feature of the disorder affecting
Weimaraner dogs that is described below.

Diagnosis
IgG deficiency is determined by a consistently low serum
concentration (below 10 mg/ml in adult dogs) of this
immunoglobulin as determined by SRID.

COMPLEMENT C3 DEFICIENCY
Definition/overview
Deficiency of the third component of complement (C3)
has been reported only once, in an experimental colony
of Brittanys. Affected dogs were more susceptible to infection and some developed glomerular disease.

25/04/16 11:25 am

Immunologic disorders

1005

WEIMARANER IMMUNODEFICIENCY

CANINE LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICENCY

Definition/overview

Definition/overview

This complex disorder is now recognized in the
Weimaraner breed internationally.

CLAD affects Irish Setters (Red and, rarely, Red and White
dogs) internationally.

Clinical presentation

Pathophysiology

Affected dogs are young adults (6–12 months of age) that
present with chronic recurrent infections of multiple
body sites, particularly mucosal and cutaneous surfaces.
Another feature is the presence of hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HOD), which is more consistently a feature in
affected dogs in the USA (where the disease is known as
HOD of Weimaraners [Figures 22.28–22.30]). The most
consistent immunologic abnormality in affected dogs
is subnormal serum IgG, and in patients that are serially monitored this immunoglobulin appears never to
attain its normal range. Some dogs also have IgM and/
or IgA deficiency and in the USA, neutrophil function
defects have also been documented. The most unusual
feature of this disorder is that the clinical signs appear
to be triggered by vaccination and the disease often has
clinical onset around the time of the 12 month booster
vaccine.

Affected dogs develop chronic recurrent infections of
multiple body sites from a young age. This is one of the
few examples of a canine immunodeficiency disorder for
which the precise genetic mutation and associated pathogenesis have been determined. The gene defect means
that affected dogs are unable to express the adhesion
molecules CD11b and CD18 on the surface of ­granulocytes.
Consequently, these cells are unable to interact with
ligands on vascular endothelium to mediate exocytosis from blood into tissue. These dogs therefore develop
severe infection of tissues (without pus formation) associated with a striking blood neutrophilia.

Management
The prognosis for this disease is variable; some dogs spontaneously recover, others have chronic recurrent disease,
and some die during the initial disease outbreak. Antiinflammatory doses of glucocorticoids appear to provide
the best therapeutic outcome.

SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFIENCY

Diagnosis
A molecular diagnostic test is available to determine the
carrier status of Irish Setters (the disease is autosomal
recessive in inheritance) and with the cooperation of
the breed association, this trait has been virtually eliminated. This can be regarded as one of the great success
stories of veterinary immunology.

Management
As immunodeficiency disorders are untreatable (except
experimentally – see below), testing and genetic counseling offer the most practical approach to management.

CYCLIC HEMATOPOIESIS

See Chapter 16: Hematologic disorders.
(See also Chapter 16: Hematologic disorders.)
22.28

22.29

22.30

Figures 22.28–22.30 This 3-month-old Weimaraner puppy (22.28) had severe debilitating hypertrophic osteodystrophy that
was complicated by bacterial sepsis. The dog was hospitalized in intensive care in order to receive parenteral fluid support and
antibiotics. Besides having severe metaphyseal swelling (22.29), the puppy also became septic and developed hemorrhagic skin
bullae (22.30) from which bacteria were isolated. It also had meningitis and several abscesses that were found on postmortem
examination. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

K22463_C022.indd 1005

25/04/16 11:25 am

1006

Multisystemic disorders

Definition/overview

Pathophysiology

Recent experimental studies (using this canine disease
as a model for the human equivalent) have identified the
precise genetic mutation of this disorder, which lies in the
gene encoding the adaptor protein complex 3 β subunit,
the effect of which is to disrupt the intracellular movement of neutrophil elastase.

The proliferating plasma cells are associated with two
distinct paraneoplastic effects. The first relates to the
production of parathyroid hormone-like peptide, which
leads to osteoclastic resorption of bone and the development of focal ‘punched-out’ osteolytic lesions. The second
is the characteristic secretion of a structurally abnormal immunoglobulin (paraprotein), which appears as
a monoclonal gammopathy on protein electrophoresis.

Management
Gene replacement therapy has been developed in an
experimental setting.

22.31

THYMIC HYPOPLASIA AND HYPOTRICHOSIS OF
BIRMAN CATS
Definition/overview
This is one of the few documented primary immunodeficiency disorders of cats, and was reported in a single litter of kittens. The association between hairlessness and
thymic development is also well-recognized in particular
inbred experimental strains of ‘nude’ rats and mice, and
is also likely to affect the Mexican Hairless Dog.

IMMUNE SYSTEM NEOPLASIA
LYMPHOMA
See Chapters 8 (Digestive disorders [pharynx to anorectum]), 18 (Dermatologic disorders), and 19 (Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases).

Figure 22.31 Section from a discrete nodular mass excised
from the pinna of an 8-year-old male Dachshund. The tumor
comprises a closely packed sheet of plasmacytoid cells, with
scattered examples of multinucleate cells and cells with giant
nuclei (both represented here). Although cytologically this
appears to be an aggressive neoplasm, these are generally
benign lesions that do not recur following excision.

LYMPHOID LEUKEMIA
See Chapter 16: Hematologic disorders.

22.32

PLASMACYTOMA
Definition/overview
This benign plasma cell tumor is documented in both
dogs and cats, and generally presents as a single nodular
mass arising on the face (lip), ears, and feet. The plasma
cells may display considerable pleomorphism histologically (Figure 22.31), but these tumors do not recur after
excision and only rarely progress to multiple myeloma.

MULTIPLE MYELOMA
Definition/overview
Multiple myeloma is a malignant plasma cell tumor that
targets the bone marrow in dogs and soft tissue (particularly liver and spleen) in cats, although a range of sites
may be affected in both species (Figure 22.32).

K22463_C022.indd 1006

Figure 22.32 Bone marrow core biopsy from a 12-year-old
neutered female Golden Retriever with monoclonal
gammopathy identified on serum protein electrophoresis.
The medullary cavity is filled by well-differentiated neoplastic
plasma cells, which have virtually excluded the hemopoietic
lineages in this field. The large cell at the base of the image is a
megakaryocyte.

25/04/16 11:25 am

Immunologic disorders

22.33

1007

Management
Chemotherapeutic protocols are described for management of this disease.

HISTIOCYTIC NEOPLASIA
(See also Chapter 18: Dermatologic disorders.)

Definition/overview
A spectrum of histiocytic neoplasia is documented in
the dog and it has a particular predilection for Bernese
Mountain Dogs and Flat-coated Retrievers.

Pathophysiology
Figure 22.33 Section from a pulmonary mass taken at necropsy
from a 6-year-old neutered female Bernese Mountain Dog. The
mass comprises a sheet of highly pleomorphic histiocytic cells
with abundant eosinophilic to mildly vacuolated cytoplasm and
a round, pale nucleus with chromatin clumps. There are both
multinucleate cells and cells with giant nuclei present. A mitotic
figure is present at the lower edge of the image. The sternal
lymph nodes of this dog were also infiltrated.

Immunohistochemical studies have defined this group
of tumors as being of dendritic cell origin. The disorders
range from the benign and spontaneously regressive
histiocytoma of young dogs through to the reactive disorders (cutaneous and systemic histiocytosis) and the
malignancies (localized and disseminated histiocytic sarcoma) (Figure 22.33).

Diagnosis
These paraproteins are more commonly IgG than IgA or
IgM, and rarely may take the form of free heavy or light
chains that are not assembled into an immunoglobulin
structure. Free light chains are of sufficiently low molecular weight to pass through the glomerular filter and
be present in urine as ‘Bence Jones protein’. IgA and IgM
paraproteins may be associated with serum hyperviscosity and a range of secondary effects related to this.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of multiple myeloma relies on identification of characteristic clinical and radiographic features
and the presence of monoclonal gammopathy. Further
immunodiagnostic investigation of this gammopathy is
discussed above. Important differentials for monoclonal
gammopathy include particular infectious diseases such
as ehrlichiosis and leishmaniasis in the dog and feline
infectious peritonitis virus infection in the cat. A range
of tests may be applied to the identification of Bence
Jones proteinuria.

K22463_C022.indd 1007

Diagnosis is by biopsy, and immunohistochemical confirmation is now widely applied.

MAST CELL TUMOR
See Chapter 18: Dermatologic disorders.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Day MJ (2011) Clinical Immunology of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn.
Manson Publishing, London.
Day MJ, Schultz RD (2014) Veterinary Immunology: Principles and
Practice, 2nd edn. CRC Press, London.
Hoffman JM, Creevy KE, Promislow DEL (2013) Reproductive
capability is associated with lifespan and cause of death in
companion dogs. PLoS ONE 8:e61082.
Nuttall T (2013) The genomics revolution: will canine atopic
dermatitis be predictable and preventable? Vet Dermatol
24:10-18.
Whitley N, Day MJ (2011) Immunomodulatory drugs and
their application to the management of canine immunemediated disease. J Small Anim Pract 52:70–85.

25/04/16 11:25 am

This page intentionally left blank

1009

Part 4
Elements of therapy

K22463_C023.indd 1009

Chapter 23

Fluid therapy
Gareth Buckley & Travis Lanaux

Chapter 24

Pain management
Steven M. Fox

Chapter 25

Nutrition of the critically-ill dog and cat
Justin Shmalberg

Chapter 26

Management of the obese dog or cat
Alexander J. German

23/04/16 1:31 pm

This page intentionally left blank

1011

Chapter 23
Fluid therapy
Gareth Buckley & Travis Lanaux

Fluid therapy is one of the most commonly employed
therapies in veterinary medicine. Treatment of a variety
of diseases may employ some form of fluid therapy. Fluids
are drugs and have many potential benefits and possible
side-effects. It is important to tailor a specific fluid plan to
each individual patient. The goals of this chapter are to
introduce the types of fluids available, describe the characteristics of different fluid types, develop a fluid plan,
and discuss specific clinical situations that present particular challenges in using fluids.

be noted that dextrose will also significantly contribute to
tonicity of a fluid and some of the lower sodium preparations that contain dextrose may actually be i­ sotonic or even
hypertonic. Plasma sodium concentration in most species
is around 140 mEq/l (140 mmol/l). As a generalization, fluids absent of dextrose with a sodium ­concentration less
than 125 mEq/l are typically considered hypotonic fluids.
Isotonic fluids typically have a sodium concentration in
the 130–150 mEq/l range. Hypertonic fluids typically have
a sodium concentration greater than 160 mEq/l.
Another common way to describe crystalloid solutions
is whether the solution is a maintenance or a replacement fluid:

CRYSTALLOIDS

●● Maintenance fluids. Typically low in sodium com-

INTRODUCTION

Crystalloids are the most commonly encountered class of
fluids. Crystalloids are solutions of salt. There are various ways to describe categories of crystalloids including tonicity or osmolality, whether the fluid is balanced,
and the type of buffer contained. Sodium and potassium
­concentrations are often the major determinants of crystalloids for descriptive purposes.
Tonicity is determined by the number of impermeant
solutes in a solution, meaning the number of solutes that
do not freely diffuse across cellular membranes. Similar
to tonicity is osmolality. Osmolality refers to the number of osmotically active particles in a particular solution. Water will diffuse across a membrane and try to
balance the relative ratio between water molecules and
impermeant solutes on either side of a membrane. As an
example, if a large amount of an impermeable solute is
added to one side of a membrane, water will move across
the membrane from the lower solute concentration to the
higher solute concentration to dilute the side with higher
number of solutes (Figures 23.1a–d).
When describing the tonicity or osmolality of a crystalloid, it is often described in reference to normal plasma.
Often, sodium is the major electrolyte determining the
tonicity of crystalloid solutions. Therefore, crystalloids
are generally categorized as hypotonic, isotonic, or hypertonic based on sodium concentration. However, it should

K22463_C023.indd 1011

pared with normal plasma. Many maintenance fluids
also contain higher potassium concentrations. The
term maintenance is in regard to the normal losses
associated with the patient that occur during the day.
Usually, water and electrolytes are lost through respiration, urination, defecation, sweating, and other
insensible losses. These secretions are generally low
in sodium and high in potassium. Maintenance fluids
are intended to account for these regular losses and
are usually administered at lower ‘­maintenance’ rates
to maintain a normal state of hydration and euvol­
emia. Most maintenance fluids have a sodium concentration in the 40–80 mEq/l range and a potassium
concentration in the 10–20 mEq/l (­10–20 mmol/l)
range. Examples of maintenance fluids, such as
half strength (0.45%) saline, PlasmaLyte-M, and
Normosol-M, are listed in Table 23.1. It is extremely
important to realize that maintenance fluids and
hypotonic fluids may be dangerous to bolus or
administer at high rates. Administration of water
or a hypotonic fluid intravenously (IV) may cause
a rapid shift of water into the red blood cell (RBC),
leading to cell lysis. Dextrose is often added to maintenance fluids to supply calories to the patient. The
addition of dextrose will also make the fluid isotonic
to hypertonic and safer in case of an accidental rapid
administration of the fluid.

23/04/16 1:31 pm

1012

Elements of therapy

23.1

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figures 23.1a–d (a) A chamber separated by a semipermeable membrane. The dark blue dots represent freely permeable water
molecules. (b) Sodium ions (red dots) are added to the left side. Sodium is able to slowly diffuse across the semipermeable
membrane. Initially, water will be drawn to the left side due to the osmotic activity of sodium. As sodium diffuses across the
membrane the water will also re-equilibrate as shown in 23.1c. (d) Large impermeable molecules (yellow bars) are added to the left
side of the chamber. Water will be drawn to the left side of the membrane and an osmotic gradient will be maintained.
Table 23.1 Composition of maintenance fluids.
-

Na+
(mEq/l)

K+
(mEq/l)

Glucose
(g/l)

Cl
(mEq/l)

Ca2+
(mEq/l)

Mg2+
(mEq/l)

Buffer

Osmolarity
(mOsmol/l)

0.45% NaCl

77

0

0

77

0

0

0

155

2.5% Dextrose in
O.45% NaCl

77

0

25

77

0

0

0

280

Normosol-M in 5%
dextroseŧ

40

13

50

40

0

3

Acetate

363

Plasma-Lyte 56

40

13

0

40

0

3

Acetate

111

Plasma-Lyte 56 in
5% dextrose∫

40

13

50

40

0

3

Acetate

363

Fluid

Hospira, Inc. Lake Forest, IL. ∫ Baxter Healthcare Pty Ltd. Toongabbie, NSW.
Note: For Na+, K+, and Cl : 1 mEq/l = 1 mmol/l; for Ca2+ and Mg2+: 1 mEq/l = 0.5 mmol/l.

ŧ

●● Replacement fluids. Have sodium and p
­otassium
concentrations closer to those of normal plasma.
Replacement fluids are isotonic and typically have
potassium concentrations similar to that of normal
plasma (4.0 mEq/l or mmol/l). Replacement fluids
may generally be administered at much higher rates
than maintenance fluids and are intended to ‘replace’

K22463_C023.indd 1012

a missing volume of plasma. In veterinary medicine,
replacement fluids are often used in a maintenance
setting due to the fact that most patients with normally functioning kidneys will excrete the excessive
sodium load s­upplied by a higher sodium replacement fluid. However, in patients who may be more
sensitive to sodium loading, such as those with heart

23/04/16 1:31 pm

Fluid therapy

disease, end-stage liver disease, or kidney disease
with reduced glomerular filtration rates, extreme
caution should be used with replacement fluids.
Examples of replacement fluids, such as 0.9% NaCl,
lactated Ringer’s solution, and Normosol-R, are listed
in Table 23.2. Note: 0.9% NaCl is an acidic solution
because of the extra chloride it contains; some clinicians no longer recommend using it as a resuscitating solution because of its adverse effects on the
cellular environment.

1013

would be considered normal. Buffers found in commonly
used products can be found in Tables 23.1 and 23.2.
There are some instances in which a specific buffer
may influence the fluid choice for a patient. Lactate is
converted within the liver and should be avoided in
patients with end-stage liver failure. Lactate buffered
solutions do not need to be avoided in patients with
type A lactic acidosis. Lactic acidosis will be discussed
in more detail later in this chapter. Caution should be
used with acetate-­containing fluids when administering
rapid, large v
­ olume IV boluses due to reports of r­ efractory
­hypotension, mostly in cats.
Hypertonic saline and mannitol are examples of
hypertonic or hyperosmotic crystalloid solutions. The
most common preparations of hypertonic saline are 3%,
5%, and 7.2% sodium chloride in solution. Hypertonic
saline has become more widely used for initial resuscitation strategies for an array of diseases and management of patients with head trauma. The high tonicity of
hypertonic saline preparations will draw water out of the
interstitial and intracellular spaces into the vasculature.
Hypertonic saline has a rapid onset of effect for intravascular expansion, but the duration is often limited to
15–30 minutes. When 7.2% hypertonic saline is used
in resuscitation strategies, other fluid types are often
administered in conjunction with this solution. Another
commonly employed use for hypertonic saline is for the
management of cerebral edema and head trauma. When
used for the management of cerebral edema, hypertonic saline may be used alone or independent of other
fluids. Hypertonic saline (7.2%) is usually administered
as IV boluses of 2–4 ml/kg body weight over a period of
5–10 minutes.
Mannitol is an example of a hyperosmotic solution.
Unlike the other crystalloids, it has no sodium chloride

Another common descriptor applied to crystalloids is
whether the solution is a balanced solution. A balanced
solution refers to the different electrolytes added to the
fluid. Balanced solutions have common electrolytes supplemented in concentrations similar to those of plasma.
Other types of electrolytes found in plasma include calcium, magnesium, and phosphorus. Examples of balanced
crystalloid solutions include lactated Ringer’s solution,
Normosol, and Plasma-Lyte. Conversely, 0.45% and 0.9%
saline are examples of fluids not containing additional
electrolytes. Balanced solutions are often preferred
except in certain circumstances in which a patient may
have an electrolyte disturbance; for example, patients
with hypercalcemia or when co-administration with
other treatments such as blood products is required.
A buffer may also be added to the crystalloid solution to help maintain a more neutral pH. The chloride
anion found in most crystalloid solutions has an acidifying effect within the patient. Many crystalloid solutions
have a buffer to help counteract this effect and maintain
a more neutral pH in the patient. Commonly used buffers include lactate, acetate, gluconate, and bicarbonate.
These compounds are weak acids or bases depending
on the pH. Ideally, in dogs and cats a pH of 7.3 to 7.4

Table 23.2 Composition of replacement fluids.
-

Na+
(mEq/l)

K+
(mEq/l)

Glucose
(g/l)

Cl
(mEq/l)

Ca2+
(mEq/l)

Mg2+
(mEq/l)

0.9% NaCl

154

0

0

154

0

0

0

308

Lactated Ringer’s solution

130

4

0

109

3

0

Lactate

280

Normosol-Rŧ

140

5

0

98

0

3

Acetate,
gluconate

294

Plasma-Lyte 148∫

140

5

0

98

0

3

Acetate

294

Fluid

Buffer

Osmolarity
(mOsmol/l)

Hospira, Inc. Lake Forest, IL. ∫ Baxter Healthcare Pty Ltd. Toongabbie, NSW.
Note: For Na+, K+, and Cl : 1 mEq/l = 1 mmol/l; for Ca2+ and Mg2+: 1 mEq/l = 0.5 mmol/l.

ŧ

K22463_C023.indd 1013

23/04/16 1:31 pm

1014

Elements of therapy

contained within the preparation. Mannitol is a c­ rystalline
sugar that is dissolved in sterile water. Mannitol has a
tendency to form microcrystalline particles, especially
at room temperatures or below. Mannitol should generally be warmed to body temperature and administered
through a filter to prevent embolization of the crystalline
precipitation particles in the patient. Mannitol is another
agent used for management of cerebral edema, intracranial hypertension, and acute glaucoma. Mannitol is usually administered as an IV infusion of 0.5–1.5 g/kg body
weight of patient over 15–30 minutes.

COLLOIDS
Colloids are suspensions containing large molecules.
There are normally a large number of circulating proteins in the plasma. Examples of these proteins include
albumin, immunoglobulins, and enzymes. Similar to
sodium and the osmotic effect, these molecules will draw
water, producing a colloid oncotic effect. There are two
properties determining the oncotic effect of a particular
colloid in solution: the number of particles and the net
charge of the molecule. For example, albumin is the major
determinant of colloidal oncotic pressure within the vasculature. One particle of a colloid is theoretically equal to
one sodium ion in solution in the ability to attract water
molecules. However, albumin's net negative charge allows
it to draw more water than would be predicted if only
the number of molecules in suspension were considered.
This is referred to as the Bohr effect and occurs because
the negatively charged albumin will attract positively
charged ions (mainly sodium) to maintain electroneutrality on either side of a semipermeable membrane.
Water will diffuse across the membrane to balance the
concentrations between the numbers of particles on each
side of the membrane.
Ernest Starling described an equation to help better understand fluid dynamics within the body. Simply
stated, he said that the changes in hydrostatic and oncotic
pressures across a membrane help determine the net flux
of fluid across that membrane. There are other intrinsic
properties of the membrane itself, such as permeability
to water and proteins, which may also modify how much
hydrostatic pressure difference and oncotic pressure difference contribute to fluid flux in that particular tissue.
Development of peripheral limb edema or cavitary transudate effusions in severely hypoalbuminemic patients
without development of pulmonary edema is a clinical
example of this concept. Within the lung, there is easy passage of large molecules across the alveolar capillary membranes. This means that colloids exert very little effect and

K22463_C023.indd 1014

the colloid oncotic pressure is minimal in determining
fluid flux within the lung. The major determinant of fluid
flux within the lung is the difference in hydrostatic pressure across the capillary membrane, as in congestive heart
failure. An increased left atrial pressure leads to increased
pulmonary capillary pressures causing fluid leakage out
of the capillary into the interstitial and alveolar spaces,
leading to development of pulmonary edema.
Colloids are typically used for low volume resuscitation strategies or in the management of hypoproteinemic
patients. Large molecules have more difficulty leaking
out of the vasculature into the interstitial space than
sodium. The proposed benefit is that colloid solutions will
remain within the intravascular space longer than crystalloid solutions and will pull fluid from the interstitial
space into the vascular space, maintaining intravascular
volume. There are two broad categories of colloid solutions: natural colloids and synthetic colloids.
Albumin is the major contributor to oncotic pressure
in states of health. Approximately 80% of the intravascular colloid oncotic pressure is due to albumin. The natural colloids are albumin-containing products and include
whole blood, plasma, and concentrates of albumin. Whole
blood and plasma are examples of weak colloids; because
the albumin concentration is similar to that of a normal patient, it takes very large transfusion amounts to
make a significant change in the patient’s albumin, making plasma or whole blood transfusions impractical for
purposes of increasing colloidal oncotic pressure in anything but very small patients. However, whole blood and
plasma products are often useful for supplying clotting
factors in animals with coagulopathies.
Another example of natural colloid preparations are
the albumin concentrates. Lyophilized canine albumin
is currently not available, but 5% and 25% human albumin products may be purchased commercially. Human
albumin is relatively inexpensive and may be diluted to a
desired concentration and administered to correct a calculated albumin deficit (Box 23.1).
Human albumin should be used with extreme caution
in veterinary patients. It should never be used in a relatively healthy animal or in a patient that has received a
human albumin transfusion in the past. Human albumin
transfusions should be reserved for critically-ill patients
where other colloidal options have been exhausted.
Client education as to the risks versus benefits should
be of pre-eminence. Human albumin has been shown to
cause acute anaphylaxis, delayed hypersensitivity reactions, and even death in healthy animals, animals with
no known exposure to human albumin, and especially in
animals with previous human albumin exposure.

23/04/16 1:31 pm

Fluid therapy

Box 23.1. Calculating the albumin deficit.
The albumin deficit can be calculated using the equation
below:

albumin deficit (g) = 10 × (desired albumin [g/dl]) –
patient albumin (g/dl)] ×
body wt (kg) × 0.3
It is important to check and change units to accurately
determine transfusion amounts needed.
For example, increasing the albumin by 1 g/dl in a 20 kg
dog with an albumin concentration of 1.5 g/dl requires
60 g of albumin.

albumin deficit (g) = 10 × (2.5 g/dl – 1.5g/dl) × 20 × 0.3
= 60 g
If fresh frozen plasma (FFP) is used and an average
albumin concentration of 3.0 g/dl is assumed, then 1 liter
of FFP would have 30 g of albumin. This dog would require
2 liters of FFP (i.e. approximately 7 units of plasma!).

Canine albumin seems to have less risk of severe
adverse reactions in the limited veterinary research
currently available on the product. However, lyophilized
canine albumin was not commercially available during
the development of this text due to a manufacturing issue.
Hydroxyethyl starches, dextrans, and gelatins are
examples of synthetic colloids. Hydroxyethyl starches are
the most commonly used synthetic colloid solutions in
veterinary medicine and will be the focus of this chapter.
The dextrans are rarely used anymore due to higher risk
of kidney injury. Gelatins are available in Europe and the
most commonly reported adverse effects are hypersensitivity reactions.
Hydroxyethyl starches are produced from hydrolysis
of amylopectin. They are described based on the degree
of substitution and the average molecular weight of the
solution (Table 23.3). Hydroxyethyl starch solutions
are polydisperse solutions (i.e. the solution contains
­numerous different size particles in suspension). This
is in contrast to albumin, which is highly preserved
across species and generally has a molecular weight
around 69 kDa. The degree of substitution refers to the
number of glucose moieties that have been substituted
for hydroxyethyl groups and is usually reported as a
number between 0 and 1. A tetrastarch with four substitutions would be given a designation of 0.4, whereas
a pentastarch with five substitutions would be given a
designation of 0.5. The molecular weight reported for
a hydroxyethyl starch solution is a calculated number based on the n
­ umber of different size particles and

K22463_C023.indd 1015

1015

percentage of those sizes within the ­solution. In general,
higher molecular weight hydroxyethyl starch solutions
tend to be more substituted, but this is not an absolute
rule. Commercial hydroxyethyl starch solutions are generally prepared using 0.9% saline or lactated Ringer’s
solution. The degree of substitution and molecular
weight are important in determining the properties of
the hydroxyethyl starch solutions. The size of a molecule does not determine the oncotic force generated;
smaller molecules of hydroxyethyl starch generate the
same oncotic force as a larger molecule. However, larger
­molecules persist in the vasculature longer and take longer to be degraded by the body. Hydroxyethyl starches
are commonly administered as rapid IV infusions; however, in veterinary medicine it has become common
practice to give prolonged infusions of synthetic colloids
over 24–48 hours, especially in patients with hypoalbuminemia. Currently, there is little to no evidence-based
­medicine supporting the use of hydroxyethyl starch in
this way.
Maximum recommended daily dosages of hydroxyethyl
starches (Table 23.3) are often based on the risk of developing adverse reactions; in particular, development of
a coagulopathy. There are several possible mechanisms
by which hydroxyethyl starch may interfere with the
coagulation system. The most likely proposed mechanisms of hydroxyethyl starch interference in coagulation
include platelet dysfunction and weakening of clot formation due to incorporation into the fibrin clot. Adverse
effects on coagulation seem to be directly related to the
degree of substitution and not the molecular weight of
the hydroxyethyl starch solution. Higher substituted
hydroxyethyl starches tend to have a greater effect on
coagulation. The clinical significance of hydroxyethyl
starch on in-vitro coagulation testing and how it relates
to in-vivo effects is a popular area of interest in current
veterinary research.
Other reported adverse effects of hydroxyethyl
starches include acute kidney injury (AKI), fluid overload,
and anaphylaxis. In human medicine, there is a trend
away from synthetic colloid use due to the risk of AKI
and higher rates of mortality in certain types of disease
processes. There is little to no evidence providing a clear
benefit of the use of a synthetic colloid over a crystalloid.
There is some evidence supporting the use of human
albumin in certain disease processes such as sepsis; however, in veterinary medicine, there are limitations with
availability of safe natural colloid products especially
canine albumin preparations. There is very little data
regarding incidence of AKI in veterinary patients receiving hydroxyethyl starch solutions. As with any therapy,

23/04/16 1:31 pm

1016

Elements of therapy

Table 23.3 Characteristics of common hydroxyethyl starch solutions.
Hydroxyethyl starch
solution

Molecular weight
(kDa)

Degree of substitution

Base solution

Suggested maximum
daily dose

Hextend1

670

0.75

Lactated electrolyte
solution

20 ml/kg

Hespan2

670

0.75

Lactated Ringer’s
solution

20 ml/kg

Hetastarch (6%
Hetastarch in 0.9%
saline)

450

0.7

Saline

20 ml/kg

VetStarch3

130

0.4

Saline

20 ml/kg

Voluven

130

0.4

Saline

50 ml/kg

4

B. Braun Medical Inc. Bethlehem, PA, USA
BioTime, Inc. Berkeley, CA, USA
3
Abbott Laboratories. North Chicago, IL, USA
4
Fresenius Kabi Norge AS, Halden, Norway
1
2

the risk to benefit ratio should always be considered by
the clinician before instituting a therapy.

23.2

DEVELOPING A FLUID THERAPY PLAN
There are several considerations when developing a fluid
therapy plan. It is vital to tailor therapy to the individual
patient. Considerations include pre-existing hydration
status, expected normal losses, ongoing abnormal losses,
and pre-existing comorbidities. The most important part
of any fluid plan is reassessment of the patient frequently
and making changes accordingly.
Determining the hydration status may not always
be simple based on physical examination parameters
alone. Serial physical examinations are better at determining hydration status than a single examination. An
estimation of hydration status may be made based on
certain examination findings. Indicators of dehydration include tacky mucous membranes, decreased skin
turgor, sunken eyes, and many others. It is important
to remember that a well hydrated cachectic patient will
have decreased skin turgor because of the loss of normal
skin elasticity (Figure 23.2). Obese patients, on the other
hand, can have moderate dehydration with normal skin
turgor because of the increased resiliency provided by
subcutaneous fat. A more quantitative method to estimate hydration in a hospitalized patient is to weigh the
patient daily while noting that a liter of water weighs
1.0 kg and any weight loss or gain within any 24-hour
period will likely represent an addition or loss of body

K22463_C023.indd 1016

Figure 23.2 This very cachectic cat would have a loss of
skin resiliency, which might exaggerate its true degree of
dehydration. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

water. Table 23.4 helps summarize physical examination
findings and correlate them to hydration status. It is also
vital to realize the difference between dehydration and
hypovolemia. Hypovolemia represents a loss of plasma
volume, whereas dehydration represents a loss of interstitial fluid volume. Hypovolemia should be corrected
rapidly, whereas dehydration is generally corrected more
slowly over 6–24 hours. Clinical markers of hypovolemia
and poor perfusion include tachycardia, weak or bounding pulses, pallor (Figure 23.3), cold extremities, and
alteration of certain biochemical assays such as elevated
serum lactate concentration.

23/04/16 1:31 pm

Fluid therapy

1017

Table 23.4 Estimation of hydration status.
Presence of
hypoperfusion

Estimated hydration status

Physical examination findings

Overhydration

Serous nasal discharge, chemosis, pitting edema, jugular venous distension, increasing respiratory rate and effort

N/A

<5% dehydration

No detectable abnormalities

Unlikely

6–8% dehydration

Mild decrease in skin elasticity (<2 sec), tacky/sticky mucous membranes

Unlikely

8–10% dehydration

Mild lethargy, decreased skin elasticity (>3 sec), tacky/sticky mucous
membranes, eyes may appear to be slightly sunken in orbits, slight
prolongation of capillary refill time

Possible

10–12% dehydration

Marked lethargy, loss of skin elasticity (skin tent persists), dry/cold
mucous membranes, eyes appear to be sunken in orbits, prolongation
of capillary refill time

Likely

>12% dehydration

Recumbent/moribund, loss of skin elasticity (skin tent persists), dry/
cold mucous membranes, eyes appear to be sunken in orbits, prolongation/absence of capillary refill time

Definite

23.3

a patient that is not eating or drinking. It is important
to realize that maintenance requirements vary between
patients based on factors such as body size, life stage, and
comorbidities such as kidney disease. Several methods
of approximating daily maintenance fluid r­ equirements
for veterinary patients are shown in Boxes 23.2 and
23.3. However, these are approximations and the actual
needs of the patient may vary greatly from the calculated
values. For example, a pet with chronic kidney disease
may require a much greater volume of fluid to maintain
hydration than a pet with normally functioning kidneys
that is able to concentrate urine, making frequent serial
evaluations and reassessment of the patient the most
important part of any fluid plan.

Clinical example of a simple fluid therapy plan

Figure 23.3 The paw in this picture shows poor perfusion, as
shown by the digital pallor. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

Once the hydration and perfusion status of the patient
is determined, it is important to approximate the expected
normal daily losses of a patient. This is often referred
to as the maintenance requirement portion of the fluid
therapy plan. In simplistic terms, this is the amount of
fluid required to maintain a normal hydration status in

K22463_C023.indd 1017

A 2-year-old castrated male mixed-breed dog weighing
7 kg is presented for acute vomiting and diarrhea. While
obtaining a history, it is revealed that the client's grandfather is visiting and fed the patient a slice of pepperoni
pizza with extra cheese a couple of hours prior to the
onset of vomiting and diarrhea. The patient had four episodes of emesis over the last 12 hours, each time vomiting approximately 2–3 teaspoons of liquid. He also had
a single bout of approximately one cup of watery brown
diarrhea. Based on your physical examination findings
you determine the patient to be approximately 7% dehydrated. His vitals are within normal reference ranges and
he has good femoral pulse quality. The patient has no significant abnormalities on a complete blood count, chemistry profile, or serum lactate concentration.

23/04/16 1:31 pm

1018

Elements of therapy

Box 23.2. Common methods of estimating daily water
requirements.
Calculation based on daily resting energy requirement
equations:

(30 × BW[kg]) + 70 = ml/kg/24 hours
70 × BW0.75 = ml/kg/24 hours
Quick estimates of daily water requirements:
•• 80–100 ml/kg/24 hours for neonates
•• 60 ml/kg/24 hours for small dogs
•• 50 ml/kg/24 hours for medium dogs and cats
•• 40 ml/kg/24 hours for large breed dogs
•• 30 ml/kg/24 hours for giant breed dogs
Once the approximate maintenance requirements for a
patient are determined, the clinician must also address
the abnormal ongoing losses of fluid from the patient.
Examples include vomiting, diarrhea, and exudative
wounds. Collection of fluids and measuring these losses
by direct means or calculating fluid volumes through
changes in weight of soiled bedding may help to quantify
and better approximate these losses. Some common useful
conversions are listed in Box 23.3.
A clinical example: if fresh bedding weighed 1.8 kg prior
to being soiled and increased to 2.3 kg after the patient
vomited on the bedding, there is a net gain of 0.5 kg. This
means that the patient vomited approximately 0.5 liters
of fluid based on the concept that 1 liter of water weighs
1 kilogram.
Combining the calculated requirements together to
make a basic fluid therapy plan, the following equation can
be used:

Estimated percent dehydration + estimated maintenance requirements + plus estimated ongoing losses
= predicted total volume of fluid.

Box 23.3. Helpful fluid conversions.
•• One liter of water weighs one kilogram
•• One teaspoon is approximately 5 ml
•• One tablespoon is approximately 15 ml
•• One cup is approximately 237 ml

The first step is to calculate the estimated percent
dehydration and decide how rapidly you wish to correct
the patient's hydration status. The estimated percent
dehydration should be converted to decimal point form
and multiplied by the bodyweight as below:
The patient is estimated to be 7% dehydrated = 0.07
0.07 × 7 kg = 0.49 kg

K22463_C023.indd 1018

This would equate to a 0.49 liter (490 ml) loss of
body water.
You wish to correct the patient’s hydration over a 10-hour
period. Therefore, for the first 10 hours of your fluid therapy plan you will add 49 ml/hour to the estimated maintenance and ongoing losses.
The second step is to estimate the patient's maintenance requirements. You decide to use the calculated resting energy requirement (RER) formula as demonstrated
below:
RER = 70 × (7 kg)3/4 = 301 kcal/day or 301 ml/day
Therefore, divide 301 ml by 24 hours and the estimated
maintenance fluid rate will be 12.5 ml/hour.
The third step in developing a fluid therapy plan is to
estimate the ongoing abnormal fluid losses. The ongoing losses are often much more difficult to estimate.
Some clinicians prefer to use a multiple of the predicted
maintenance fluid requirements as a starting point,
such as 2 or 3 times the calculated maintenance rate.
Alternatively, you can estimate losses based on history.
For example, the client reported that the patient vomited
2–3 teaspoons of liquid each time emesis occurred and the
patient had four episodes of emesis over the last 12 hours.
He had a single bout of approximately one cup of watery
brown diarrhea within that time. His estimated losses
over the 12 hour period would then be:
One teaspoon equals 5 ml, therefore each emesis was
approximately 15 ml of fluid; the patient had four episodes
over 12 hours, equaling approximately 60 ml. The patient
was also estimated have one cup of liquid diarrhea, which
is equal to approximately 236 ml of fluid. Adding the
losses together, you calculate that the patient's ongoing
losses are 296 ml of fluid per 12 hours or 25 ml per hour.
The fourth step is combining all the calculations
together:
Correction of estimated percent dehydration + estimated
maintenance requirements + plus estimated ongoing
losses = predicted total volume of fluid.
49 ml/hour + 12.5 ml/hour + 25 ml/hour = total fluid rate
of 86.5 ml/hour for the first 10 hours of therapy
The fifth and most important step is frequently reassessing the patient, as a large volume of fluid will be
administered over a 10-hour period. It is important the
patient is reassessed every 1–2 hours and the fluids
adjusted accordingly. A couple of hours after beginning
therapy, the patient stops vomiting and only has one
more episode of small volume diarrhea. You determine

23/04/16 1:31 pm

Fluid therapy

that the patient’s hydration status is ­
improving and
decide to decrease the fluid rate to account only for continued correction of hydration status and calculated
estimated maintenance rate (49 ml + 12.5 ml). The fluid
rate is therefore decreased to 62 ml/hour, rounding to the
nearest whole number. The patient’s body weight should
hold steady once all of the fluid deficits are replaced and
maintenance fluids are continued.

FLUID RESUSCITATION
Fluid resuscitation strategies are employed when there
is evidence of hypovolemia and reduced intravascular
volume. In general, the aim of treatment is to identify
then correct the volume deficit safely and rapidly. This
is different to the strategies described previously in this
chapter for correction of mild–moderate dehydration or
provision of maintenance requirements, as fluids to correct hypovolemia are usually delivered as a bolus over a
short period of time (15–20 minutes) rather than over several hours or days.

Identification of hypovolemic shock
Physical examination, cardiovascular monitoring, and
point-of-care laboratory testing can be used in the assessment of volume status. Patients with hypovolemic shock
typically go through two distinct phases: compensated
or ‘hyperdynamic’ and decompensated or ‘hypodynamic’
shock (Table 23.5). Patients in compensated shock are
hypovolemic; however, the cardiovascular system is
able to compensate for the loss in volume by increasing
heart rate and increasing cardiac contractility. In these
patients, cardiac output may actually be increased. As
hypovolemia progresses, the compensatory mechanisms
are unable to keep up with the loss of intravascular volume, and life-threatening decompensated shock occurs.

1019

Physical examination findings in compensated shock
are reflective of an increase in cardiac output. These
patients are typically tachycardic with bounding or ‘tall,
narrow’ pulses, slightly injected mucous membranes, and
a rapid capillary refill time (CRT) (normal <2 seconds).
They are usually mentally aware, ambulatory, and with
a normal rectal temperature. As patients progress to
decompensated shock, they develop signs of reduced perfusion. They usually remain tachycardic until they enter
a terminal phase, peripheral pulses become difficult to
feel or palpate as ‘thready’, mucous membranes become
pale, and CRT becomes prolonged (Figure 23.4). Weakness
or collapse is common and the level of consciousness will
begin to decline in severely affected patients. Rectal temperature in dogs is often normal or slightly low.
Cats usually enter a phase of hypodynamic shock
much earlier than dogs. Typical signs of hypovolemia
in a cat include lethargy, bradycardia, and low rectal
temperature.
Cardiovascular monitoring can be helpful to confirm
physical examination findings. The most commonly
used technique is noninvasive measurement of blood
pressure. Dogs will maintain their blood pressure until
they are markedly hypovolemic, so a normal blood pressure does not rule out hypovolemic shock. Often, dogs in
23.4

Table 23.5 Signs of hypovolemic shock in dogs.
Compensated

Decompensated

Tachycardia

Tachycardia

Injected mucous
membranes

Pale mucous membranes

Rapid CRT

Prolonged CRT

Bounding pulses

Weak/thready pulses
Weakness/collapse
Reduced consciousness
Low rectal temperature

K22463_C023.indd 1019

Figure 23.4 The lip pallor illustrates this dog’s delayed
capillary refill time. (Courtesy M. Schaer)

23/04/16 1:31 pm

1020

Elements of therapy

decompensated shock will have a blood pressure below
normal (systolic <90 mmHg, mean <65 mmHg). As discussed above, cats will enter a hypodynamic phase of
shock with associated low systolic and mean arterial
blood pressure much earlier than dogs. Urine output can
also be monitored. Normal urine output (>2 ml/kg/hour)
usually indicates adequate renal perfusion if the kidneys
are able to concentrate urine. Another commonly used
monitoring technique for assessing volume status is bedside echocardiography, using cardiac chamber size as a
measure of preload. Central venous pressure, which has
been widely used for many years as a method of assessing preload and hence volemic status, has been widely
discredited in more recent studies and cannot be recommended as an accurate indication of volume status. Other
more advanced techniques, such as cardiac output monitoring, pulse pressure variation, and microperfusion
scanning, may be excellent indicators of volume status
but are rarely used due to the need for specialized equipment and training.
Some basic laboratory testing can be extremely helpful in the assessment of hypovolemia. Measurement of
packed cell volume (PCV) and total solids (TS), combined
with physical examination findings, can indicate the
presence of volume loss and often directs the clinician
to the cause of the volume loss. For example, an acutely
hemorrhaging patient would be expected to have low
TS, but due to splenic contraction might have a normal
or high PCV. With ongoing hemorrhage, the PCV will
also eventually begin to fall. A patient that has severe
dehydration leading to hypovolemia will be hemoconcentrated, resulting in a high PCV and high TS. A patient
with massive protein loss, such as in hemorrhagic gastroenteritis (see Chapter 8: Digestive diseases [pharynx
to anorectum]), will often present with a very high PCV
but a low TS, suggesting a disproportionate loss of plasma
water over RBCs. Assessment of kidney function using
blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine combined with
urine specific gravity can also be helpful. A patient that
is developing a prerenal azotemia due to hypovolemia
and subsequently reduced glomerular filtration rate will
often have a high BUN with slightly increased or normal
creatinine and concentrated urine.
Point-of-care lactate measurement can be extremely
helpful in the assessment of hypovolemia; lactate in
a n
­ ormal patient at rest is usually <2 mmol/l. Lactate
is formed during anaerobic metabolism and so will
increase in situations where oxygen demand is outstripping supply, as seen in hypovolemic shock. Normal
vigorous exercise and pathologic conditions that cause
excessive muscle movement, such as grand mal seizures
and tremor syndromes, can cause elevations in lactate

K22463_C023.indd 1020

without hypovolemia being present. Additionally, certain conditions ­without hypovolemia can cause what is
known as a type B ­hyperlactatemia; these include cancer, sepsis, severe liver disease, and certain drugs such
as epinephrine. Lactate measurement can be especially
helpful in detecting hypovolemia in critical situations
such as a busy emergency room, and in detecting hypovolemia where physical examination signs are subtle or
contradictory. Lactate can be measured using an inexpensive handheld device similar to a glucometer or using
handheld or bench top blood gas analyzers. The smaller
handheld devices tend to be less accurate at low ranges
(<3 mmol/l); however, moderate to severe elevations in
lactate, indicating significant hypovolemia, can be easily
detected.

Treatment of hypovolemia
The different types of fluids available for fluid resuscitation have been discussed at length earlier in the chapter.
There are, broadly, two approaches to fluid resuscitation.
These should be varied according to the underlying cause
of the hypovolemia (if known) and the severity of the condition. Examples of different clinical scenarios will be discussed later in the chapter. The most commonly employed
approach is conventional resuscitation. This involves
using relatively large IV boluses of isotonic crystalloids,
usually 15–30 ml/kg at a time for dogs and 10–15 ml/kg
for cats, repeated to effect. Each bolus is usually delivered over 15–20 minutes before reassessment of volume
status and clinical response to the bolus. This is probably
the method of choice for patients with large water losses,
such as animals with severe vomiting and diarrhea or
hypovolemia secondary to dehydration. The advantages
of this technique are that the fluids used are inexpensive,
familiar to all practitioners, and widely available. The
disadvantage is that use of large volumes of crystalloids
can dilute out blood components such as clotting factors.
This is especially important when managing patients
with severe hemorrhage (see Severe hemorrhage).

The ‘myth’ of shock dose fluids
Many texts advocate providing ‘shock dose’ fluids to
patients with signs of hypovolemic shock. The volumes
quoted are usually 90 ml/kg (dog) and 60 ml/kg (cat);
this actually represents the entire blood volume of the
animal. Clinically, it is rarely necessary to administer
this large a volume of crystalloid fluids and so fluids
should be administered in smaller aliquots (15–30 ml/kg
for dogs and 10–15 ml/kg for cats) and titrated to effect
(see Knowing when to stop: endpoints in fluid resuscitation). Over-resuscitation can be as harmful as under-­
resuscitating the patient (Figures 23.5a–d). Occasionally,

23/04/16 1:31 pm

Fluid therapy

extremely large volumes of crystalloids are necessary,
such as in patients with massive gastrointestinal losses of
fluid. In these cases fluid therapy can be continued until
endpoints are reached with careful monitoring of the
patient’s clinical response and laboratory values.
The second major strategy is low volume resuscitation.
This usually involves using hypertonic fluids, commonly
7.2% saline. A normal dose range is 2–4 ml/kg administered IV over 5–10 minutes. The mechanism of action of
these fluids has been discussed above. Hypertonic saline is
low cost and, as a low volume is administered, it can allow
for more rapid correction of hypovolemia than using conventional fluid resuscitation, especially in large breed
dogs. Use of hypertonic saline in resuscitation should be
avoided where the patient has significant pre-existing
dehydration and/or hypernatremia. Sometimes, hypertonic saline is combined with artificial colloids such as
hetastarch at a dose of 5 ml/kg; this will prolong the action
of the hypertonic fluid but may carry some of the disadvantages of artificial colloids as discussed above.

1021

Knowing when to stop: endpoints in
fluid resuscitation
How to figure out when to stop fluid resuscitation can be
more challenging than initial identification of hypovolemia. In straightforward cases, such as gastrointestinal
loss, the parameters used to diagnose hypovolemia can
be used to assess response to treatment; this includes
normalization of heart rate and pulse quality, mucous
membrane color, CRT, mental status, correction of hypotension, and restoration of urine output. Remember that
in some cases other strategies will be needed and sometimes it will not be possible to achieve these endpoints.
For example, in trauma patients or patients with acute
abdominal disease, pain may be a confounding factor and
will increase heart rate independent of volemic state. In
patients with distributive shock (e.g. those with gastric
dilatation-volvulus or sepsis), correction and treatment
of the underlying disease, along with fluid resuscitation, will be required to normalize physical examination parameters. Patients with septic shock present one

23.5

a

b

c

d

Figures 23.5a–d These four radiographs illustrating intravenous overload are from a dog taken at the time of admission (a, b) and
after 2 days of intravenous fluids (c, d).

K22463_C023.indd 1021

23/04/16 1:31 pm

1022

Elements of therapy

of the biggest challenges in assessing endpoints of fluid
­resuscitation. For these more complex situations, assessment of lactate clearance and use of more advanced
techniques such as echocardiography and cardiac output
monitoring can be helpful. The key factor overall is continuous reassessment of the patient to ensure adequate
but not excessive fluid resuscitation.

Specific scenarios in fluid resuscitation
Severe hemorrhage
Hemorrhagic shock is a major challenge in small animals;
it can be caused by trauma or by spontaneous bleeds,
for example in a coagulopathic state (e.g. anticoagulant
rodenticide toxicity) or from rupture of benign or neoplastic masses. Severe external bleeding can be easily
recognized and often temporarily controlled during stabilization; however, internal bleeding, especially into the
abdominal cavity, can be more challenging to recognize
promptly. In veterinary medicine, rapid emergency surgery is not always readily available and so it is important
for veterinarians to have a strategy for medical stabilization of acute hemorrhage (Box 23.4).
The aim of fluid resuscitation in acute hemorrhage is to
replace just enough intravascular volume to restore oxygen delivery to the tissues, but to avoid some of the major
pitfalls of giving large amounts of fluids to a hemorrhaging patient. These complications include dilution of clotting factors by vigorous fluid resuscitation and increasing
blood pressure to s­upranormal ­
values. Furthermore,
certain fluid choices, such as artificial colloids, can
­
directly induce coagulopathy and enhance further bleeding. It can be thought of as a vicious cycle; the more the
patient bleeds, the more fluids they require for resuscitation, the more they are resuscitated, the more they bleed.
Additionally, the fluids used in conventional resuscitation

Box 23.4. ‘Recipe’ for a 30 kg dog with severe hemorrhage
(30%+ blood loss).
Dog will appear extremely tachycardic, may become
bradycardic in terminal phase, pulses will be very weak/
undetectable, mucous membranes will be very pale or
white with a prolonged or absent CRT. Blood pressure will
be low.
Place a peripheral IV catheter. Give a bolus of 4 ml/kg
7.2% hypertonic saline over 5–10 minutes. Can follow with
500–1,000 ml isotonic crystalloids while blood products
are being prepared. Transfuse 2 units packed RBCs with
one unit of FFP rapidly. If further packed RBC units are
required, transfuse in a ratio of 1:1 with FFP.

K22463_C023.indd 1022

(isotonic crystalloids) do not have any oxygen c­ arrying
capacity, so if large volumes of isotonic crystalloids are
being used, clinicians should be aware that they are
replacing RBCs and plasma with a plain crystalloid fluid.
For this reason, conventional resuscitation (see above) is
probably not the best approach to an acutely hemorrhaging patient.
Low volume resuscitation using hypertonic fluids
(see above) is commonly used as it provides a method
of resuscitation that avoids large fluid volumes and
can be rapidly delivered. There are additional benefits
for patients with polytrauma (see Raised intracranial
pressure).
Hemostatic resuscitation is an emerging technique
for fluid resuscitation of patients with severe hemorrhage. These are patients that have severe, ongoing
­hemorrhage where the clinician anticipates a requirement to administer multiple blood transfusions during
stabilization. The principle of hemostatic resuscitation
is to replace what is lost. In hemorrhagic shock, blood is
being lost and so the patient is resuscitated using blood
products, typically either fresh whole blood or a combination of packed RBCs and FFP. This approach appears
effective in minimizing development of iatrogenic coagulopathy and of further bleeding. The disadvantages of
hemostatic resuscitation include needing immediate
­
access to blood products, cost, and the risk of transfusion reactions (see Chapter 16: Hematologic disorders).
This can be combined with conventional or low volume
resuscitation.
Traditional endpoints of resuscitation can be used.
Blood pressure monitoring is important in these cases; a
mean arterial pressure of 60 mmHg and a systolic pressure of 90 mmHg are recommended to minimize the risk
of re-bleeding following resuscitation.

Raised intracranial pressure
Clinicians confront the challenge of treating patients
with raised intracranial pressure (ICP) regularly; head
trauma, inflammatory diseases, and space occupying
lesions can all contribute to raising of ICP and the risk of
brain h
­ erniation. Recognition of this problem is crucial
in appropriate management and is discussed elsewhere
in this book (see Chapter 14: Disorders of the nervous
system and muscle). There are two main considerations
for fluid therapy management of a patient with raised
ICP: the first is to ensure that the brain is adequately
perfused with blood to allow for healing and to reduce
the risk of secondary brain injury; the second is to use
fluids that either lower ICP or at least do not exacerbate
the problem.

23/04/16 1:31 pm

Fluid therapy

Cerebral perfusion pressure can be calculated using
the equation below:
Cerebral perfusion pressure = mean arterial pressure
(MAP) – intracranial pressure (ICP)
Using this equation, it can be deduced that a patient
must have at least an adequate MAP to overcome the
increase in ICP, otherwise the brain will not be perfused.
During fluid resuscitation in a brain injured patient, it
is recommended to achieve a systolic blood pressure of
at least 100 mmHg and a MAP of at least 80 mmHg. In
human medicine, ICP monitoring is used to guide therapy. This is currently impractical in most veterinary
institutions and so the guidelines above give us a reasonable approximation.
Fluid choices become important – in the injured brain,
large volumes of isotonic crystalloids can worsen cerebral
edema, even as they correct hypotension. For this reason,
low volume resuscitation with hyperosmolar agents such
as 7.2% hypertonic saline is preferred, as described previously. Hypertonic saline, in addition to providing volume
resuscitation and restoration of blood pressure, also has
the potential to reduce cerebral edema and hence lower
ICP. Mannitol, another hyperosmolar agent, typically
dosed at 1–1.5 g/kg IV, can be effective at lowering ICP;
however, it will induce a marked osmotic diuresis and
so should be avoided in patients with concurrent hypovolemia, as it could lead to worsening hypotension and
reduced cerebral perfusion.
Overall, fluid therapy should be targeted to clinical
signs and to blood pressure. Vigorous resuscitation with
large volumes of isotonic crystalloids should be avoided
for fear of worsening edema; however, fluids should not

1023

be withheld from patients with raised ICP as the risk of
leaving the brain underperfused and leading to secondary brain injury is high.

Pulmonary disease
In general, the principles of fluid therapy for the pulmonary patient are similar to those for other conditions;
however, it is imperative to avoid administration of excessive amounts of fluids. The lungs of dogs and especially
cats are prone to development of edema in response to
increases in hydrostatic pressure. This effect is amplified
in the diseased lung, especially in inflammatory conditions such as acute lung injury and in patients with pulmonary contusions. Isotonic crystalloids are generally
used; fluid boluses should be smaller (15–20 ml/kg for
dogs and used cautiously, if at all, in cats) with continuous
reassessment of the patient. Fluid resuscitation should be
stopped once endpoints are (or are almost) met. Artificial
colloids should be avoided in patients with severe pulmonary disease because of the risk of colloid particles
leaking into the interstitial space and thereby worsening
the edema. The take home message in treating patients
with lung disease is to err on the side of caution with fluid
resuscitation; it is easy to give more but harder to take
away. Provide enough fluids to maintain adequate perfusion and hydration (Table 23.6).

SUMMARY
Regardless of the disease being treated or the technique being used, it is recommended to attempt to recognize and correct hypovolemic shock rapidly. Reassess
the patient early and often and look for achievement of
endpoints. Remember that lactate can be a useful tool in

Table 23.6 Comparison of fluid resuscitation strategies.
Conventional

Low volume

Hemostatic

Small fluid volume, hypertonic crystalloids +/- colloids

Variable volume, blood products

Inexpensive, widely available, minimize dilutional coagulopathy, rapid
resuscitation

Provides O2 carrying capacity, minimizes
coagulopathy

No O2 carrying capacity, cannot use in
dehydrated patients

Not widely available, expensive, risk of
transfusion reaction

Description
Large fluid volume, isotonic crystalloids
Advantages
Inexpensive, widely available

Disadvantages
No O2 carrying capacity, dilutional coagulopathy, formation of edema

K22463_C023.indd 1023

23/04/16 1:31 pm

1024

Elements of therapy

addition to physical examination parameters for both
identification of hypovolemia and assessing response
­
to treatment. Fluid therapy is often essential but is not
always benign. Certain conditions, especially ­uncontrolled
­hemorrhage or pulmonary disease, have the potential
to be ­worsened by inappropriate or overly aggressive
fluid therapy. In these cases, the use of small increments
of fl
­ uids along with r­egular patient r­eassessment will
­provide the ­opportunity to titrate the dose of fluids to

K22463_C023.indd 1024

effect and h
­ opefully avoid the pitfalls associated with
­cardiopulmonary fluid overload.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
DiBartola SP (2006) Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid–Base Disorders in
Small Animal Practice, 3rd edn. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Silverstein DC, Hopper K (2015) Small Animal Critical Care
Medicine, 2nd edn. Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis.

23/04/16 1:31 pm

1025

Chapter 24
Pain management
Steven M. Fox

INTRODUCTION
Pain management has become one of the most inspiring
contemporary issues in veterinary medicine. It is an area
of progressive research, revealing new perceptions on
an almost daily basis. Accordingly, ‘current’ insights into
pain management is a relative term. In some respects the
management of pain, especially in companion animal
practice, is more thorough than in human medicine. It is
worth noting that most pain in humans is managed based
on rodent data, while considerable direction for managing
pain in animals is based on human data. This is because
many physiologic systems are similar across species, and
large population studies often conducted in human medicine require resources prohibitive in veterinary medicine.
Therefore, evidence-based veterinary pain management
will likely always be under some degree of scrutiny.
The frontier of discovery for treating pain is founded
on an understanding of physiology. Physiologic mechanisms underpin the quality of evidence supporting
treatment protocols and provide insights for new drug
development. An overview of pain physiology is intellectually intriguing but extensive. Therefore, the following synopsis is selected to gain an appreciation of the
complex mechanisms underlying pain and to encourage
lateral thinking with regard to treatment modalities.
To paraphrase Albert Einstein: “some things can be made
simple, but only so much so before they lose meaning”.

The pain pathway
The pain pathway (Figure 24.1) suggests reference to the
simplistic nociceptive pathways of a three-neuron chain,
with the first-order neuron originating in the periphery and projecting to the spinal cord, the second-order
­neuron ascending the spinal cord, and the third-order
neuron projecting into the cerebral cortex and other
supraspinal structures. ‘For every complex issue, there
is an answer that is simple, neat… and wrong!’ Pain is
not a stimulus. There are no ‘pain fibers’ in nerves and
no ‘pain pathways’ in the brain. The experience of pain
is the final product of a complex information-processing
network.
The existence of a specific pain modulatory system was
first clearly articulated in 1965 by Melzack and Wall in
the gate control theory of pain (Figure 24.2). This was the
first theory to propose that the CNS controls nociception.
The basic premises of the gate control theory of pain are
that activity in large (non-nociceptive) fibers can inhibit
the perception of activity in small (nociceptive) fibers
and that descending activity from the brain can also
inhibit that perception.
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)
is a clinical implementation of the gate theory. TENS is
thought to act by preferential stimulation of peripheral
Third-order
neuron

24.1

UNDERSTANDING THE PHYSIOLOGY
OF PAIN
Nociception is the transduction, conduction, and central
nervous system (CNS) processing of signals generated by
a noxious insult. The conscious, cognitive processing of
nociception results in pain (i.e. pain infers consciousness).
It is reasonable to assume that a stimulus considered painful to a human, that is damaging or potentially damaging
to tissues, and evokes escape and behavioral responses
would also be painful to an animal, because anatomic
structures and neurophysiologic processes leading to the
perception of pain are very similar across species.

K22463_C024.indd 1025

Second-order
neuron

First-order neuron

Figure 24.1 Simplified
representation of the
afferent pain pathway.
(Adapted from Tranquilli
WJ, Grimm KA, LA Lamont
(2000) Pain Management for
the Small Animal Practitioner.
Teton New Media, Jackson.)

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Elements of therapy

In Aδ nerve fibers, action
potentials can reach
speeds comparable to
sprinters competing
in the summer
Olympics
(56 mph [90 km/h])

Nodes of Ranvier

24.2
Fast transmitting
myelinated fiber
+

Inhibitor
neuron

Figure 24.2 Melzack and
Wall’s Gate Theory of pain.
Signals conducted through the
fast-transmitting myelinated
fiber reach the inhibitor neuron
faster than signals from the
slow-transmitting unmyelinated
fiber. The inhibitor neuron then
shuts down the transmitter
neuron, rendering the signal
from the slow-transmitting
unmyelinated fiber ineffective.

+
–
–

–

Impulses in C nerve
fibers travel only
about 2.2 mph.
That’s slower than
most people walk!

somatosensory fibers, which conduct more rapidly than
nociceptive fibers. This results in a stimulation of inhibitory interneurons in the second lamina of the posterior
horn (substantia gelatinosa) that effectively blocks nociception at the spinal cord level. Furthermore, the gate
theory may explain why some people feel a decrease in
pain intensity when skin near the pain region is rubbed
with a hand, and how a local area is ‘desensitized’ by rubbing prior to insertion of a needle.

Hyperalgesia
Peripheral neural mechanisms of pain from noxious
stimuli are only one aspect of pain sensibility. There is an
additional dynamic plasticity of great biological importance that relates to stimulus intensity and sensation: the
­phenomenon of hyperalgesia.
Hyperalgesia is defined as a leftward shift of the
stimulus–response function that relates magnitude of
­
pain to stimulus intensity (Figure 24.3) and is a consistent feature of somatic and visceral tissue injury and
inflammation. Hyperalgesia to both heat and mechanical
stimulus that occurs at the site of an injury is due to sensitization of primary afferent nociceptors. Mechanisms
of the phenomenon have been studied in various tissues
including the joint, cornea, testicle, gastrointestinal (GI)
tract, and bladder. Hyperalgesia at the site of injury is
termed primary hyperalgesia, while hyperalgesia in the
uninjured tissue surrounding the injury is termed secondary hyperalgesia.

WHY DOES IT KEEP HURTING?
An important tenet underlies enhanced response of
the CNS to mechanical stimuli of cutaneous injury: ‘the
peripheral signal for pain does not reside exclusively

K22463_C024.indd 1026

Spinal feedback

Transmitter
neuron

+
Slow transmitting
nonmyelinated fiber

24.3
Hyperalgesia
Pain intensity

1026

Injury

Normal
pain
response

Allodynia

Stimulus intensity
Figure 24.3 Hyperalgesia is a leftward shift of the stimulus/
intensity curve.

with nociceptors; under pathologic circumstances, other
receptor types, which are normally associated with the
sensation of touch, acquire the capacity to evoke pain’.
This principle applies to secondary hyperalgesia, as well
as to neuropathic pain states in general. Central sensitization is the term denoting augmentation of responsiveness of central pain-signaling neurons to input from
low-threshold mechanoreceptors; it is central sensitization that plays the major role in secondary hyperalgesia,
not peripheral sensitization. This underlines the value of
local anesthetic blocks. When the CNS is spared the input
of nociceptors at the time of the acute insult, the hyperalgesia does not develop.
Injured nerve fibers develop ectopic sensitivity. A substantial proportion of C fiber afferents are
nociceptors, and abnormal spontaneous activity has
been observed in A fibers and C fibers originating from
neuronal-­resultant nerve transections. In patients with

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

hyperalgesic neuromas, locally anesthetizing the neuroma often ­eliminates the pain.
Nociceptor activity induces increased sympathetic discharge. In certain painful patients, nociceptors acquire
sensitivity to noradrenaline released by sympathetic
efferents. Pain dependent on activity in the sympathetic
nervous system is referred to as sympathetically maintained pain. In human studies of stump neuromas and
skin, it is concluded that apparently sympathetically
maintained pain does not arise from too much adrenaline, but rather from the presence of adrenergic receptors
that are coupled to nociceptors. In sympathetically maintained pain, nociceptors develop α-adrenergic sensitivity
such that the release of noradrenaline by the sympathetic
nervous system produces spontaneous activity in the
nociceptors. This spontaneous activity maintains the CNS
in a sensitized state. Therefore, in sympathetically maintained pain, noradrenaline that normally is released from
the sympathetic terminals acquires the capacity to evoke
pain. In the presence of a sensitized central p
­ ain-signaling
neuron (second order), pain in response to light touch is
signaled by activity in low-threshold mechanoreceptors –
allodynia. Alpha-1 adrenergic antagonists would lessen
the nociceptor activity and the resultant hyperalgesia.
The predominant neurotransmitter used by all primary
afferent fibers is glutamate, although other excitatory
transmitters, notably adenosine triphosphate (ATP), act to
depolarize dorsal horn neurons directly or on p
­ resynaptic
autoreceptors to enhance glutamate release during action
potential firing. Primary afferents, unique in their capacity to release neurotransmitters peripherally and so
underlie neurogenic inflammation, convey information
to the CNS. In the dorsal horn, peptides such as substance
P impact on postsynaptic dorsal horn ­neurons, thus setting the gain or magnitude of the nociceptive response.
Following thermal, mechanical, or chemical stimulation
of primary afferents, the excitatory event must initiate
a regenerative action potential involving voltage-gated
sodium, calcium, or potassium channels, culminating
in neurotransmitter release if sensory information is to
be conveyed from the periphery to the spinal cord dorsal horn. Within the dorsal horn, the CNS ‘decides’ if the
message lives or dies. The hypersensitization of windup is
testimonial that the CNS dorsal horn is dynamic, and the
important role of these voltage-gated ion channels makes
them attractive targets for novel and selective analgesics.

Windup
Windup is a form of activity-dependent plasticity characterized by a progressive increase in action potential output from dorsal horn neurons elicited during
the course of a train of repeated low-frequency C fiber

K22463_C024.indd 1027

1027

or nociceptor stimuli. Repetitive discharge of primary
­afferent ­nociceptors results in co-release of neuromodulators such as substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide
(CGRP), together with glutamate (the main neurotransmitter used by nociceptors synapsing with the dorsal
horn) from nociceptor central terminals. These neuropeptides activate postsynaptic G-protein-coupled receptors,
which leads to slow postsynaptic depolarizations lasting
tens of seconds. Resultant cumulative depolarization is
boosted by recruitment of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor current through inhibition of Mg2+ channel
suppression.
The most involved receptor in the sensation of acute pain,
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-isoxazole-­4-proprionic
acid (AMPA), is always exposed on afferent nerve terminals. In contrast, those most involved in the sensation of
chronic pain, NMDA receptors, are not functional unless
there has been a persistent or large scale release of glutamate. Repeated activation of AMPA receptors dislodges
magnesium ions, which act like stoppers in transmembrane sodium and calcium channels of the NMDA receptor
complex (Figure 24.4). Calcium flowing into the cell activates p
­ rotein kinase C, the enzyme needed for nitric oxide
(NO) synthase ­production of NO. NO diffuses through the
dorsal cell membrane and synaptic cleft into the ­nociceptor
and stimulates guanyl synthase-induced closure of K+
­channels. Since endorphins and enkephalins inhibit pain
by opening these channels, closure induces opioid resistance. NO also stimulates the release of substance P, which
by binding to neurokinin-1 receptors in the dorsal horn
membrane, triggers c-fos gene expression and promotes
neural remodeling and hypersensitization. Accompanying
this windup, less glutamate is required to transmit the
pain signal and more antinociceptive input is required for
analgesia. Endorphins cannot keep up with their demand
and essentially lose their effectiveness. The clinical implications are underappreciated. Inadequately treated pain is
a much more important cause of opioid tolerance than use
of opioids themselves. NMDA activation can also cause neural cells to sprout new connective endings.
The dorsal horn of the spinal cord is organized into
lamellae comprised of dorsal horn neurons and the inhibitory and excitatory synaptic connections they receive
and make (Figure 24.5). Non-neural glial cells – the
­oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, and microglia – modulate
the operation of these neuronal circuits. A key feature
of the somatosensory system, modifiability or plasticity,
resides in the dorsal horn. Neuronal information processing is not fixed, but is instead dynamic, changing in a manner that is dependent on levels of neuronal excitability
and synaptic strength, profoundly diversifying for either
a short period (seconds) or prolonged periods (days),

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1028

Elements of therapy

Acute pain

Chronic pain

Nociceptor
terminal

24.4

Glutamate
Closed K+ channel

Substance P

Guanyl synthase
AMPA

NMDA

Ca++

K+

NK-1

PKC
Mg++

Na+

K+

Na+

K+

Nitric oxide

up

nd
Wi
Mg

Ca++

++

Nitric oxide
synthase

up

nd
Wi

Local network modulation

Descending inputs

C-fos gene
expression

Inhibitory
interneurons

Figure 24.4 The NMDA
receptor is a primary player in
CNS ‘windup’. In chronic pain,
which involves the massive
release of glutamate, the
magnesium plug of the NMDA
receptor is dislodged, allowing
an intercellular increase of
calcium, which stimulates the
cell to a heightened state of
transmission.

24.5

Nociceptive afferents
Non-nociceptive
afferents

Excitatory interneurons
Afferent input/integration
Nociceptive only
Nociceptive/non-nociceptive
Non-nociceptive only
Nociceptive motor reflexes
Output

1 Nociceptive only
2 Mixed
3 Non-nociceptive ascending
output

K22463_C024.indd 1028

1 23
Combined ascending nociceptive output

Figure 24.5 Schematic
organization of dorsal horn
input, output, and local
modulatory networks.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

or perhaps indefinitely. Spinal cord transmissions work
as a binary response: low-intensity stimuli interpreted
as innocuous or nonpainful (e.g. touch vibration or hair
movement) versus high-threshold stimuli producing pain.
Different responses are elicited depending on whether
low- or high-threshold afferents have been a
­ctivated,
because of the different central circuits engaged.
Contributing to CNS plasticity is its capacity for structural reorganization of synaptic circuitry. Neurons may
die, axon terminals may degenerate or atrophy, new axon
terminals may appear, and the structural contact between
cells at the synapses may be modified. This can result in
the loss of normal connections, formation of novel abnormal connections, and an alteration in the normal balance
between excitation and inhibition. Structural reorganization and its functional sequelae can result in changed sensory processing long after the initial injury has healed.

TYPES OF PAIN
Nociceptive pain
Everyday acute pain, or ‘nociceptive pain,’ occurs when
a strong noxious stimulus (mechanical, thermal, or chemical) impacts the skin or deep tissue. In response to these
stimuli, nociceptors, a special class of primary sensory
nerve fibers, fire impulses that travel along the peripheral nerves, past the sensory cell bodies in the d
­ orsal root
­ganglion (DRG), along the dorsal roots, and into the spinal
cord (or brainstem).
Thereafter, the conscious brain interprets these transmissions from populations of second- and third-order

neurons of the CNS. Acute pain is purposeful. It protects us
from potentially severe tissue injury by noxious insults
from everyday activities. Acute pain is also short acting
and relatively easy to treat. Examples of nociceptive pain
would be contact with a hot object, a painful toe pinch, or
a chemical burn.

Postoperative, incisional pain
Postoperative, incisional pain is a specific and common
form of acute pain. Studies in rodents have characterized
the primary hyperalgesia to mechanical and thermal
stimuli. Primary hyperalgesia to mechanical stimuli lasts
for 2–3 days, while hyperalgesia to heat lasts longer – 6
or 7 days after plantar incision. The secondary hyperalgesia is present only to mechanical, not thermal stimuli.
Conversion of mechanically insensitive silent nociceptors
to mechanically responsive fibers is thought to play an
important role in the maintenance of primary mechanical
hyperalgesia, while release of ATP from injured cells is considered to play an important role in the induction of postskin incision mechanical allodynia. The incision-­induced
spontaneous activity in primary afferent fibers helps to
maintain the sensitized state of wide dynamic range neurons of the dorsal horn, in contrast to other forms of cutaneous injury where hyperalgesia is NMDA dependent.
It is important to note that adequate levels of general
anesthesia with a volatile drug such as isoflurane do not
prevent central sensitization. The potential for central
sensitization exists even in unconscious patients who
appear to be clinically unresponsive to surgical stimuli
(Figure 24.6). This has been validated in the dog, where
24.6

Anesthesia
time

60

Control
Anesthesia
Analgesia
Surgery
±SE

Change in plasma cortisol (ng/ml)

50
Surgery
40
30
20

Analgesia

10
Anesthesia

0

K22463_C024.indd 1029

211

91

34
40

0
–10

60

120

180
Time (minutes)

Control
240

1029

300

360

Figure 24.6 Changes
in plasma cortisol
concentrations from
pretreatment values.
Although dogs may be
at a surgical plane of
anesthesia, the noxious
stimuli of surgery are still
conducted, as assessed
by pain-induced cortisol
responses. (Adapted
from Fox SM, Mellor DJ,
Firth EC et al. (1994)
Changes in plasma
cortisol concentrations
before, during and after
analgesia, anaesthesia
and anaesthesia plus
ovariohysterectomy
in bitches. Res Vet Sci
57:110–118.)

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1030

Elements of therapy

cortisol spikes in response to ovariohysterectomy noxious
stimuli occur during the anesthetic period.

Inflammatory pain
Inflammatory pain, often classed along with acute pain as
‘nociceptive,’ refers to spontaneous pain and tenderness
felt when the skin or other tissue is inflamed, hot, red,
and swollen (e.g. infection). The inflammatory process is
mediated and facilitated by the local release of numerous
inflammatory mediators. When there is tissue injury and
inflammation, the firing threshold of the Aδ and C nociceptive afferents in response to heating of the skin is lowered
into the non-noxious range. This is a result of prostaglandin production from cyclo-oxygenase (COX) activity in
the arachidonic acid cascade, which acts directly on the
peripheral terminals of the Aδ and C fibers, lowering their
threshold to thermal (but not electrical) stimuli.
Release of substance P and nerve growth factor (NGF)
into the periphery causes a tissue reaction termed neurogenic inflammation, which can occur in any neuropathic pain state (Figure 24.7). Neurogenic inflammation
is driven by events in the CNS and does not depend on
granulocytes or lymphocytes, as with the classic inflammatory response to tissue trauma or ­immune-mediated
cell ­damage. Cells in the dorsal horn release chemicals
that cause action potentials to fire backwards down the
nociceptors. The result of this dorsal root reflex is that
nociceptive dendrites release substance P and CGRP
into peripheral tissues, causing degranulation of mast
cells and changing vascular endothelial cell characteristics. The resultant outpouring of potent inflammatory and vasodilatating agents causes edema and
potentiates transmission of nociceptive signals from the
periphery.

CHRONIC PAIN
Chronic pain can result from sustained noxious ­stimuli,
such as ongoing inflammation, or it may be independent of the inciting cause (Figure 24.8). Regardless of
its ­
etiology, chronic pain (e.g. osteoarthritis, cancer,
or chronic otitis) is maladaptive and offers no useful
­biologic function or survival advantage. The nervous system itself actually becomes the focus of the pathology and
contributes to patient morbidity. Effective treatment for
chronic pain can be an enigma. A number of studies have
shown that the longer a pain lingers, the harder it is to
eradicate. This is because pain can reconfigure the architecture of the nervous system it invades (Figure 24.9).
In contrast to acute pain, where the pain stops quickly
after the noxious stimulus has been removed, the pain

K22463_C024.indd 1030

24.7

Antidromic
stimulation

Dorsal
horn
cell

Nociceptor

Calcitonin generelated peptide

Mast
cell

Substance P
Serotonin,
histamine

Nitric oxide,
bradykinin,
vasoactive
interstitial
peptide

Edema

Blood vessel

Figure 24.7 Neurogenic inflammation involves an antidromic
firing of neurons (action potentials fire backwards down the
nociceptors). Packets of chemicals located at the peripheral
terminals are released. Thereafter, pain signals from peripheral
nerves are heightened and the cycle of chronic pain is
continued.
Tissue damage, inflammation
Pathologic pain
Mechanical
Inflammatory
Traumatic

Low intensity
stimulus

Sensitizing soup
of neuropeptides

24.8
Hyperalgesia

Stimulation of
high & low threshold
Aδ & C fibers
Stimulation of
low threshold
Aβ fibers
Transduction sensitivity

Windup

Allodynia

Figure 24.8 Chronic pain often leads to windup, with
hyperalgesia and allodynia.

and tenderness of inflammation may last for hours,
days, months, or years. Recognition of the potential
peripheral mediators of peripheral sensitization after

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

Dorsal root ganglion

1031

24.9

Peripheral nerve

Injured sensory
nerve fibers

Glutamate
GABAergic
interneuron
Uninjured
sensory nerve
fibers

AMPA receptor
NMDA receptor
Inhibitory
transmitters:
GABA, glycine
GABA receptor
Glycine receptor

Transmission
neuron
Dorsal horn

Figure 24.9 Peripheral nerve injury leads to a number of changes in the peripheral nervous system as well as the central nervous
system. Peripheral nerve injury causes (1) spontaneous activity in primary sensory afferents; (2) changes in the production and
distribution of membrane receptors and ion channels; (3) phenotypic shift of sensory neurons; (4) shrinkage and loss of distal nerve
stump; (5) sprouting of sympathetic nerve fibers; (6) invasion and activation of immune cells. In the spinal cord peripheral nerve
injury causes (1) central sensitization; (2) synaptic reorganization; (3) loss of GABAergic inhibition; (4) downregulation of rapid
receptors; (5) activation of microglia.

inflammation gives an insight as to the complexity of this
process. A ­second type of persistent, or chronic, pain is
­neuropathic pain, which arises from injury to the peripheral nervous system (PNS) or CNS. Neuropathic pain can
be a sequela to any pain state, especially pain that has
been allowed to ‘windup’ the CNS. Chronic pain appears to
have no purpose, is characterized by extended duration,
and is frequently difficult to treat.

ACUTE TO CHRONIC PAIN
Normally, a steady state is maintained in which there is
a close correlation between injury and pain. However,
long-lasting or very intense nociceptive input or the
removal of a portion of the normal input can distort
the nociceptive system to such an extent that the close
correlation between injury and pain can be lost. A progression from acute to chronic pain might be considered
as three major stages or phases of pain, proposing that
different neurophysiologic mechanisms are involved
depending on the nature and time course of the originating stimulus (Figure 24.10). These three phases are:
(1) the ­processing of a brief noxious stimulus; (2) the consequences of prolonged noxious stimulation, leading to
tissue damage and peripheral inflammation; and (3) the
consequences of neurologic damage, including peripheral
neuropathies and central pain states.

Phase 1: acute nociceptive pain
Mechanisms underlying the processing of brief noxious stimuli are fairly simple, with direct route of
­transmission centrally toward the thalamus and cortex

K22463_C024.indd 1031

Brief trauma
Phase 1

24.10

Central
nervous
system

Pain

Phase 2

Brief

Inflammation
Phase 3

Nerve or CNS
damage

Persisting

Abnormal

Figure 24.10 The three major stages or phases of pain.

resulting in the conscious perception of pain, with the
possibility for modulation occurring at synaptic relays
along the way. It is reasonably easy to construct plausible
and detailed neuronal circuits to explain the features of
phase 1 pain.

Phase 2: inflammatory pain
If a noxious stimulus is very intense or prolonged, leading
to tissue damage and inflammation, it might be considered phase 2 pain, as influenced by response properties
of various components of the nociceptive system changing. These changes signify that the CNS has moved to a
new, more excitable state as a result of the noxious input
generated by tissue injury and inflammation. Phase 2 is

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1032

Elements of therapy

characterized by its central drive, a drive that is triggered
and maintained by peripheral inputs. Patients experience spontaneous pain and sensation changes evoked by
stimulation of the injured and surrounding areas. Such
change is known as hyperalgesia (see Hyperalgesia).

Phase 3: neuropathic pain
Phase 3 pain is abnormal pain, generally the consequence
of damage to peripheral nerves or to the CNS itself, characterized by a lack of correlation between injury and
pain. Clinically, phase 1 and 2 pains are symptoms of
peripheral injury, whereas phase 3 pain is a symptom
of neurologic disease. These pains are spontaneous, triggered by innocuous stimuli, or are exaggerated responses
to minor noxious stimuli. A particular combination of
mechanisms responsible for each of the pain states is
likely unique to the individual disease or to a particular
subgroup of patients. Phase 3 pain may involve genetic,
cognitive, or thalamic processing that has yet to be identified. Activation of these mechanisms may be abnormally
prolonged or intense due to abnormal input from damaged neurons, or simply because the regenerative properties of neurons are very poor or ‘misdirected’. Healing
may never occur.

NEUROPATHIC PAIN
The International Association for the Study of Pain
defines neurogenic pain as ‘pain initiated or caused by a
primary lesion or dysfunction or transitory perturbation
in the peripheral or central nervous system’. Due to potential vagaries within this definition, simplistically, neuropathic pain can be identified as pain due to a primary
lesion of the PNS or CNS. Neuropathic pain is divided
from diseases with demonstrable neural lesions in the
PNS and CNS and conditions with no tangible lesion of
major nerves. Therefore, there are ambiguities in identifying neuropathic diseases and currently no tests are
available that can unequivocally diagnose neuropathic
pain. Nevertheless, a large body of evidence validates the
physiologic process of neuropathic pain.
The relative role of peripheral and central mechanisms
in neuropathic pain is not well understood and likely
reflects different disease states and genetic differences;
however, the abnormal input of neural activity from
nociceptor afferents plays a dynamic and ongoing role in
maintaining the pain state. Two key concepts are central
to an understanding of neuropathic pain: (1) inappropriate activity in nociceptive fibers (injured and uninjured);
and (2) central changes in sensory processing that arise
from these abnormalities.

K22463_C024.indd 1032

CANCER PAIN
Because we are practicing better medicine in more
patients, our patients are living longer. Consequently, we
are seeing a higher prevalence of cancer in our patient
population, and there is an increased focus on improving quality of life. Many patients present with pain as
the first sign of cancer, and 30–50% of all human cancer
patients will experience moderate to severe pain. Lifealtering cancer-induced pain will be experienced by
75–95% of human patients with metastatic or advanced
cancer. Insights from cancer pain in humans are valuable because animals cannot talk. Recently, the first animal model of cancer pain has been developed. This is the
mouse femur model, where bone cancer pain is induced
by injecting murine osteolytic sarcoma cells into the
intramedullary space of the femur.
Tumor cells and tumor-associated cells secrete a
­variety of factors that sensitize or directly excite primary afferent neurons (i.e. prostaglandins, endothelins,
interleukins 1 and 6, epidermal growth factor, transforming growth factor, and platelet-derived growth factor).
Identification of these factors provides potential blocking
strategies for treatment. One such strategy is treatment
with selective COX-2 nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs). COX-2 ­inhibitors (­ coxib-class NSAIDs) are
currently used to inhibit inflammation and pain. Further,
experiments suggest that coxibs may have the added
advantage of reducing the growth and metastasis of the
cancer.
Endothelin-1 is a second pharmacologic target for cancer pain. Clinical studies in humans have shown a correlation between prostatic cancer pain and plasma levels
of endothelins. Similar to prostaglandins, endothelins
that are released from tumor cells are also thought to be
involved in regulating angiogenesis and tumor growth.
A hallmark of tissue injury is local acidosis, and tumor
cells become ischemic and apoptotic as the tumor burden
exceeds its vascular supply. Transient receptor potential
vanilloid-1 (TRPV1) and acid-sensing ion channel (ASIC)-3
are expressed by nociceptors and are sensitized by the
acidic tumor environment. This is likely accentuated by
osteolytic tumors where there is a persistent extracellular microenvironment of acidic pH at the osteoclast and
mineralized bone interface. Studies have shown that
osteoprotegerin and a bisphosphonate, both of which
induce osteoclast apoptosis, are effective in decreasing
­osteoclast-induced bone cancer pain.
To appreciate the complexity of cancer pain is to understand that the biochemical and physiologic status of sensory neurons is a reflection of factors derived from the

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

PRE-EMPTIVE ANALGESIA
Pain memories imprinted within the CNS, mediated by
NMDA receptors, produce hyperalgesia and contribute to
allodynia (Figure 24.11). In several animal experiments,
c-fos expression (the c-fos gene serves as a marker for

K22463_C024.indd 1033

24.11

No

rm

al

esia
Hyp
eral
g

ia
All
od
yn
Response

innervated tissue, and therefore changes in the periphery
associated with inflammation, nerve injury, or tissue injury
influence changes in the phenotypes of sensory neurons.
NGFs and glial-derived neurotrophic factor influence such
changes. The medley of growth factors to which the sensory neuron is exposed will change as the growing tumor
invades the peripheral tissue innervating the neuron. With
the potential for changing phenotype and response characteristics, it is understandable that the same tumor in the
same individual may be painful at one site of metastasis
but not at another. It follows that different patients with
the same cancer may have vastly different symptoms.
As the tumor state progresses, changing factors may
complicate the cancer pain state. In the mouse model
of bone cancer, as the tumor cells begin to proliferate,
pain-related behaviors precede any noticeable bone
destruction. This is attributed to pro-hyperalgesic factors such as active nociceptor response in the marrow
to prostaglandins and endothelins released from growing tumor cells. At this point, pain might be attenuated
by a coxib-class NSAID or endothelin antagonist. With
continued tumor growth, sensory neurons innervating
the marrow are compressed and destroyed, giving rise
to neuropathic pain, possibly responsive to gabapentin.
Once the tumor becomes invaded by osteoclastic activity,
pain might be largely blocked by anti-osteoclastogenic
drugs such as bisphosphonates or osteoprotegerin. As the
intramedullary space becomes filled with dying tumor
cells, generating an acidic environment, TRPV1 or ASIC
antagonists may attenuate the pain. In the later stages
of bone destruction, antagonists to the mechanically
gated channels and/or ATP receptors in the highly innervated periosteum may alleviate movement-evoked pain.
This scenario illustrates how a mechanistic approach to
designing more effective therapies for cancer pain should
be created, based on an understanding of how different
stages of the disease impact on tumor cell influence on
nociceptors, and how phenotypes of nociceptors and CNS
neurons involved in nociceptive transmission change
with the course of the disease process.
Clearly, the mechanisms associated with pain are complex. However, only through an understanding of these
mechanisms can we best manage our patient’s pain with
an evidence-based confidence.

1033

Stimulus

Figure 24.11 Graphic representation of normal pain,
hyperalgesia, and allodynia showing response relative to stimulus.

cellular activation [i.e. nociception]), central sensitization, and windup do not occur if nociceptive blockade is
applied prior to the nociceptive event. Such findings suggest that presurgical blockade of nociception may prevent postsurgical wound pain or pain hypersensitivity in
clinical surgery (i.e. pre-emptive analgesia, as advocated
by the eminent pain physiologist Patrick Wall). Successful
pre-emptive analgesia must meet three criteria: (1) deep
enough to block all nociception; (2) wide enough to
cover the entire surgical area; and (3) prolonged enough
to last throughout surgery and even into the postoperative period.
Professor Wall introduced the concept of pre-emptive
analgesia to clinicians in his editorial in the journal Pain
in 1988. The emphasis of pre-emptive analgesia is to prevent sensitization of the nervous system throughout the
perioperative period. Pain can be expected from an initial surgery and the hypersensitivity that subsequently
develops. Analgesia administered after sensitization may
decrease pain somewhat, but it has little long-term benefit in addressing the pain resulting from postsurgical
inflammation. Analgesia administered before surgery
limits the pain from that stimulus and decreases subsequent hypersensitivity; however, the most effective
pre-emptive analgesic regimen is initiated before surgery and continued throughout the postoperative period
(Figure 24.12) (i.e. ‘preventive analgesia’). A review
of pre-emptive analgesia, with inclusion of suggested
drugs and dosage, has been provided elsewhere (see
Recommended further reading). A logical pre-emptive
drug protocol would include an opioid, alpha-2 agonist ±
an NMDA antagonist and an NSAID. The implementation
of perioperative NSAID therapy is controversial based on
their antiprostaglandin effect, which, in the face of hypotension, might enhance the potential for acute kidney
injury. This is why perioperative fluid support is such an
important consideration.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1034

Elements of therapy

However, anti-inflammatory drugs play a substantial
role in perioperative pain management because surgery cannot be performed without subsequent inflammation, and reducing the inflammatory response in the
periphery, and thereby decreasing sensitization of the
peripheral nociceptors, should attenuate central sensitization. It has also been recognized for some time that
NSAIDs synergistically interact with both mu-opioid and
alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonists. In human medicine the
use of NSAIDs has reduced the use of patient-controlled
analgesic morphine by between 40 and 60%.

PAIN ASSESSMENT
Pain management is a cardinal example of integrating
the science of veterinary medicine with the art of veterinary practice. New graduate veterinarians are well
schooled in the science, whereas the art comes only with
experience. This is particularly true in managing pain,
because pain is a subjective phenomenon. In humans,
Surgical and
postsurgical
afferent input

Postsurgical analgesia

pain is what the patient says it is, whereas in animals,
pain is what the assessor says it is! Because pain is subjective, an abstract, multi-attribute construct similar to
intelligence or anxiety, pain management does not lend
itself to a ‘cookbook’ approach. For example, following
surgery, if the dog is lying quietly in its cage, is it doing
so because it is very content, or because it is too painful
to move? Furthermore, trained as scientists, veterinarians are schooled to assess responses based on the mean
± standard deviation, yet effective pain management
­suggests we target the least respondent patient within
the ­population, so as to ensure no patient is denied the
relief it needs and deserves.
There are many clues the attentive assessor may note
that will suggest that an animal is in pain (Table 24.1).
As a rule of thumb, any change in behavior can ­signal
pain; however, the most reliable indicator of pain is
response to an analgesic. Physiologic parameters including heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure, and temperature are not consistent or reliable indicators of pain.
Presurgical analgesia

Pre- and postsurgical
analgesia

Nociceptive input

Nociceptive input

Nociceptive input

Nociceptive input

Hypersensitivity

Hypersensitivity

Hypersensitivity

Hypersensitivity

Duration of surgery

24.12

Figure 24.12 The benefits of pre-emptive analgesia are best appreciated when it is implemented as part of a perioperative
analgesia protocol.
Table 24.1 Characteristics associated with pain in cats and dogs. (Modified from Mathews KA (2000) Management of pain.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30(4):729–752.)
Characteristic

Example

Abnormal posture

Hunched up guarding or ­splinting of ­abdomen. ‘Praying’ p
­ osition
(­forequarters on ground, h
­ indquarters in air)
Sitting or lying in an ­abnormal position. Not ­resting in a normal position

Abnormal gait

Stiff
No to partial weight bearing on injured limb
Slight to obvious limp

Abnormal movement

Thrashing
Restless
Inactivity when awake
Escape behavior

K22463_C024.indd 1034

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

1035

Table 24.1 Characteristics associated with pain in cats and dogs. (Modified from Mathews KA (2000) Management of pain.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30(4):729–752.)
Characteristic

Example

Vocalization

Screaming
Whining
Crying
None

Miscellaneous

Looking, licking, or chewing at painful area
Hyperesthesia or hyperalgesia
Allodynia
Failure to stretch or ‘wet dog shake’
Failure to yawn
Failure to use litterbox (cat)

*May also be ­associated with poor general
health

Restless or agitated
Trembling or shaking
Tachypnea or panting
Weak tail wag
Low carriage of tail
Depressed or poor response to care giver
Head hangs down
Not grooming
Decreased or picky appetite
Dull
Lying quietly and not ­moving for long durations
Stupor
Urinates or defecates ­without attempt to move
Recumbent and unaware of surroundings
Unwilling or unable to walk
Bites or attempts to bite care givers

May also be associated with apprehension
or anxiety

Restless or agitated
Trembling or shaking
Tachypnea or panting
Weak tail wag
Low tail carriage
Slow to rise
Depressed
Not grooming
Bites or attempts to bite care giver
Ears pulled back
Restless
Barking or growling
Growling or hissing
Sitting in back of cage or hiding (cat)

May be normal behavior

Eye movement, but ­reluctance to move head
Stretching when abdomen touched
Penile prolapse
Licking a wound or incision

Physiologic signs that may be associated
with pain

Tachypnea or panting
Tachycardia
Dilated pupils
Hypertension
Increased serum cortisol and epinephrine

K22463_C024.indd 1035

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1036

Elements of therapy

Various acute pain assessment measures have been used
by researchers to quantify pain. These include verbal
rating scales, simple descriptive scales, numeric rating
scales, and visual analog scales, all of which have their
limitations. The historical limitation of scales used to
assess pain has been assessment of pain on intensity
alone. Such limitation has led to the development of
multi­dimensional scales, taking into account the sensory
and affective qualities of pain in addition to its intensity. The ‘Glasgow Pain Scale’ is such a multidimensional
scheme and although it is detailed, its ongoing refinement may result in greater utilization. Currently, there
are no ‘scales’ to assess chronic pain. Several investigators
have suggested exploring this area of interest through
the creation of novel questionnaires as an instrument
for measuring chronic pain in dogs through its impact on
health-related quality of life.
Current methods of classifying pain are considered
unsatisfactory by some for several reasons. Foremost is
that pain syndromes are identified by parts of the body,

duration, and causative agents, rather than the mechanism involved. The argument holds that anatomic differences should be disregarded in favor of mechanisms that
apply to either particular tissues or all parts of the body,
rather than a particular part of the body. For example, the
term cancer pain relates only to the disease from which the
patient suffers, not the mechanism of any pain the patient
may experience. A ­mechanism-based approach is likely to
lead to specific pharmacologic intervention ­measures for
each identified mechanism within a syndrome. Advances
in pain management are, therefore, contingent on first
determining the s­ymptoms that constitute a syndrome
and then finding mechanisms for each of these. The clinical approach for a m
­ echanism-based ­classification of pain
is shown (Figure 24.13). This illustrates how a patient
with pain could be a
­ nalyzed from a pain m
­ echanism
perspective. It is the mechanism that needs to be the target for novel drugs rather than ­particular disease state.
Herein lies the greatest ­potential for advancement in
pain management (Table 24.2).
24.13

Patient
with pain

Diagnostic test

Transient pain
(physiological
procedural pain)

Persistent pain
(pain outlasts
stimulus)

Mechanism

Clinical examples
Venepuncture
Skin scrape

Stimulus
(independent
spontaneous/
ongoing)

Stimulus
(induced/provoked)

Tissue injury
nociceptive/
inflammatory
pain

Neuronal
injury
P-peripheral
C-central

Nociceptor
activation

P-ectopic
discharge
Peripheral
drive
C-disinhibition
unknown

Heat
Temp >40°C

Cold
Temp <20°C

Noradrenaline
Adrenaline

Light touch
(brush/cotton
balls)

Pressure
(repetitive
taps)

Pin prick
(single or
repetitive)

Clinical
examples
Arthritis
Postoperative
pain

Clinical
examples
P-peripheral
neuropathy
C-post stroke
pain

Peripheral
sensitization

Central
sensitization
Central
disinhibition

Sensitization
of afferents to
noradrenaline
or adrenaline

Aβ induced
(altered central
connections)

Sensitization
of
nociceptors

Central
sensitization
(Aδ fibers)

Clinical
example
Burn

Clinical
example
Neuropathy

Clinical
example
Sympathetically
maintained
pain

Clinical
examples
Nerve injury
Acute tissue
injury

Clinical
examples
Neuroma
Acute tissue
damage

Clinical
examples
Nerve injury
Acute tissue
injury

Thermal

Chemical

Mechanical

Figure 24.13 Clinical approach for a mechanism-based classification of pain.

K22463_C024.indd 1036

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

1037

Table 24.2 Characterization of various pain states.

Pain categories

Pain conditions

Pain mechanisms

Potential drug/
targets

Transient
­stimulus-induced
pain (nociceptive
pain)

Procedural pain
(injections/minor
injuries)

Nociceptor
activation

VRs, Na+ -TTXs,
MOR, nAChR

Thermosensitivity,
mechanosensitivity,
chemosensitivity

Minor surgical
procedures

Tissue damage
(inflammatory pain);
spontaneous and
provoked pain

Trauma/
­postoperative pain;
arthritis/infection

Nociceptor
­activation.
Peripheral
sensitization.
Central
­sensitization.
Phenotype switch

COX-2, EPR,
5-HTR, P2x, BKR,
IL-β, TNR-α, TrkA,
TrkB, Na+-TTX-R,
ASIC, α2, MOR,
DOR, A1, N-Ca2+,
NK1, nAChR,
NMDA-R, GluR5,
mGluR, PkCγ

Chemical irritants:
capsaicin, mustard
oil, formalin.
Experimental
inflammation:
carageenan, UVB,
Freund’s adjuvant,
cytokines/growth
factors

Dental
­postoperative
pain.
Abdominal
postoperative
pain.
Thoracotomy.
Joint
r­ eplacements.
Osteoarthritis

Injury: ­primary
afferent
(­neuropathic pain);
spontaneous and
provoked pain

Peripheral nerve
injury; diabetic
­neuropathy
(human); toxic
­neuropathy;
­postherpetic
­neuralgia (human)

Ectopic activity.
Phenotype switch.
Central
s­ ensitization.
Structural
reorganization.
Disinhibition

Na+-TTXr/TTXs,
α2, NMDA-R,
N-Ca2+, PKCγ
NGF/GDNF, GABA,
AEAs, gabapentin,
TCA, SNRIs

Peripheral nerve
section. Partial
nerve section.
Loose ligatures.
Experimental
diabetes. Toxic
neuropathies

Diabetic
neuropathy
(human).
Postherpetic
neuropathy
(human).
Radicular pain

Injury: central
neuron (neuropathic
pain); spontaneous
and provoked pain

Spinal cord injury;
stroke (humans)

Secondary
­ectopic activity.
Disinhibition.
Structural
reorganization

GABA-R, Na+TTXs, AEAs, TCA,
SNRIs

Spinal cord injury.
Ischemia.
Central
­disinhibition
(e.g. strychnine/
bicuculline)

Spinal cord
injury

Unknown
mechanism

Irritable bowel
­syndrome;
­ bromyalgia
fi
(humans)

? Altered gain

COX-2, NMDA-R,
Na+ channels

Animal models

Proof-ofconcept

Irritable bowel
syndrome/
fibromyalgia

VRs, vallinoid receptors; Na+-TTXs, tetrodotoxin-sensitive sodium ion channels; MOR, μ-opiate receptors; nAChr, nicotine
­acetylcholine receptor; COX-2, inducible cyclo-oxygenase inhibitors; EPR, prostaglandin receptors; 5-HTR, serotonin receptors;
P2x, ligand-gated purino receptors/ion channels; BKR, bradykinin receptors; IL-β, interleukins; TNFα, tumor necrosis factor;
TrkA, TrkB, high-affinity eurotrophin tyrosine kinase receptors; Na+-TTX-R, tetrodotoxin-resistant sodium ion channels; ASIC,
­acid-sensitive ion channels; α2, adrenergic receptors; DOR, delta opiate receptors; A1, adenosine receptors; N-Ca2+, voltage-gated
calcium ion channels; NK1, neurokinin receptors; NMDA-R, N-methyl-D-aspartic acid receptors; GluR5, kainate receptors; mGluR,
metabotropic glutamate receptors; PKCγ, protein kinase C; NGF/GDNF, nerve growth factor, glial derived neurotropic factor; AEAs,
antiepileptic agents, GABA-ergic compounds; TCA, tricyclic antidepressants; SNRIs, serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors.

DRUG CLASSES

OPIOIDS
The World Health Organization’s (WHO) proposed method
for relief of cancer pain was originally published in 1986,
with an update in 1996. The guidelines contain the WHO
analgesic ladder, a simple yet effective method for controlling cancer pain, which, when used as described, can

K22463_C024.indd 1037

provide substantial relief of pain in 75–90% of human
cancer patients. The WHO ladder advocates the use of
three classes of analgesics: nonopioid, adjuvant, and opioid. This ladder has been embraced by many for treating
pain in veterinary patients.
The analgesic effects of opium have been known for
more than 5,000 years. Unfortunately, opioid abuse is
limiting its use. Society has attempted to find a balance
between licit and illicit use, therapeutic versus adverse

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1038

Elements of therapy

effects, and medical needs and legal issues. Regardless of
the legal, administrative, and social interference issues,
no other class of drugs has remained in use for the treatment of pain for as long as opioids.
In common with spinal and supraspinal opioid
receptors, the binding of opioid agonists results in K+
channel-mediated neuronal hyperpolarization, attenu­
ation of Ca2+ entry through voltage-gated Ca2+ channels,
and reduced cAMP availability, with resultant reduction
in nociceptor activity. However, morphine and other
opioids do not have fixed actions, but operate on receptor mechanisms that are subject to alterations by other
transmitters and receptors.
Knockout mice studies suggest that three opioid receptor types regulate distinct pain modalities:

●● Mu receptors (OP3) influence responses to mechanical, chemical, and supraspinal thermal nociception.

●● Kappa receptors (OP2) modify spinally-mediated
nociception and chemical visceral pain.

●● Delta receptors (OP1) increase mechanical nociception and inflammatory pain.
Although controversial, studies suggest that neuropathic
pain due to peripheral nerve damage more often than
not shows reduced sensitivity to opioids. This is attributable to a reduction of spinal opioid receptors, nonopioid receptor-expressing Aβ fiber-mediated allodynia,
increased cholecystokinin antagonism of opioid actions,
and NMDA-mediated dorsal horn neuronal hyperexcitability, likely requiring a greater opioid inhibitory
counteraction.
Opioids are probably the best drugs available for small
animal pain control, and one might argue that ‘serious pain control’ cannot be implemented without them.
Morphine, oxymorphone, fentanyl, hydromorphone, and
meperidine are opioid agonists acting mainly at the mu
receptor, where they have a high affinity. The agonist–
antagonists (butorphanol, nalbuphine, buprenorphine,
pentazocine) are able to reverse some of the effects
of the pure agonists, but they can produce analgesia.
Buprenorphine is a kappa antagonist, with high affinity
for mu receptors and classified as a partial agonist, while
butorphanol acts at the kappa receptor and acts as a mu
antagonist. Opioid antagonists, which include naloxone,
naltrexone, and nalmefene, reverse the actions of both mu
and kappa agonists. The ‘potency’ of different opioids can
be misleading in that relative ranking is based on affinity
of the specific drug for binding to the receptor. The most
common side-effects seen with opioids include respiratory depression, nausea and vomiting, histamine release,
constipation, and central excitement. Urine production

K22463_C024.indd 1038

may be decreased for several hours following morphine
administration.
Oral administration yields low (20–60%) bioavailability because opioids are metabolized in the liver. Codeine
has the highest bioavailability, approaching 60%, and is
often administered in combination with acetaminophen.
(Note: Acetaminophen is lethal in cats.) Although morphine and hydromorphone are available as suppositories, there is little difference in efficacy or bioavailability
(~20%) from oral administration; however, this d
­ elivery
form is an option if oral administration is u
­ navailable.
The ­available oral/rectal preparations of morphine (for
human use) in the USA are listed in Table 24.3.
The highly lipid-soluble opioid fentanyl lends itself to
transdermal delivery and is available in a patch containing a drug reservoir. An ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymer membrane controls the rate of delivery to the skin.
Due in part to the differences in dermal vascularization,
drug uptake varies between the dog and cat. Studies
suggest it takes 12–24 hours to reach peak effect in the
dog, whereas peak values in the cat are reached sooner
(2–18 hours). Fentanyl patches certainly have their
place; however, they are not without concerns (e.g. classified drug in many countries, expense, difficulty sticking, variable absorption, possible skin reaction, requires
skin ­
preparation and optimal location). Following

Table 24.3 Available oral/rectal preparations of morphine
(for human use) in the USA.
Duration
of action
Immediate
release

Controlled/
sustained
release

Preparation

Dosage formulation

Tablet/capsule

1.5 mg, 30 mg

Soluble/
sublingual

10 mg

Solution

10 mg/5 ml; 10 mg/2.5 ml;
20 mg/5 ml; concentrate
20 mg/ml

Suppository

5, 10, 20, 30 mg

MS Contin

15, 30, 60, 100, 200 mg

Oramorph SR

15, 30, 60, 100 mg

Kadian (food
sprinkles)

20, 30, 50, 60, 100 mg

Avinza (food
sprinkles)

30, 60, 90, 120 mg

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

discharge, if a pet at home shows hyperexcitability, the
pet owner cannot differentiate if the behavior is due to
uncontrolled pain or opioid overdose. Patches may have
their optimal use in chronic conditions such as cancer.
For p
­ ostoperative pain, one might consider a patient
requiring opioid administration as an in-house hospital patient who can be closely monitored and treated
with ­
cost-effective morphine, discharging the patient
only when appropriate pain management can be provided by oral medication (e.g. an NSAID). In the year
2012, ­topical fentanyl was ­introduced into the USA for
postoperative pain associated with s­urgical procedures
in dogs. This unique ­formulation ­provides 4 days of analgesic effect from a single dose of 2.7 mg/kg.
Morphine is also used for intra-articular analgesia.
Several investigators suggest that morphine works best
in combination with bupivacaine; however, local anesthetics are recognized to be chondrotoxic. With recognition that there are opioid receptors in the s­ pinal cord,
opioids are applied directly to these receptors by epidural
or intrathecal administration. This takes a
­ dvantage of
smaller doses to minimize systemic effects.
Opioids are relatively safe. Potential side-effects
include:

Table 24.4 Classification of various opiates/opioids by the
World Health Organization.
Weak opioids

Full agonists

Codeine

Morphine

Dihydrocodeine

Fentanyl

Dextropropoxyphene

Hydromorphone

Tramadol

Codeine
Methadone

Strong opioids

Tramadol

Morphine

Meperidine (pethidine)

Methadone
Fentanyl

Partial agonists

Hydromorphone

Buprenorphine

Meperidine (pethidine)

Pentazocine

Oxycodone

Butorphanol

Buprenorphine
Levorphanol

Agonists–antagonists

Dextromoramide

Nalbuphine

●●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

Sedation or CNS depression.
Excitement or dysphoria.
Bradycardia.
Respiratory depression.
Panting.
Laryngeal reflex depression.
Histamine
release
(particularly
with
IV
administration).
●● Vomition and defecation (nausea).
●● Constipation (longer-term use).
●● Urinary retention (more common with epidural
administration).

Opioids at-a-glance (see also Table 24.4)
Meperidine (pethidine)

1039

Nalorphine
Full antagonists
Naloxone
Naltrexone
Alvimopan

Methadone
●● Does not cause histamine release.
●● Higher bioavailability than morphine.
●● NMDA and serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SRI) activity.

Hydromorphone

●● Less sedation than morphine.
●● More likely to cause histamine release; IV use

●● More sedation than oxymorphone, but shorter

discouraged.
●● Anticholinergic effects associated with structural
similarity to atropine.
●● In humans, the metabolite normeperidine is a neurotoxic CNS stimulant associated with adverse reactions.
●● Very short acting.

●● No histamine release with IV administration.

Oxymorphone

●● Agonist–antagonist.
●● Weak analgesic, with analgesic ceiling effect.
●● Short duration of analgesia (~40 minutes in the dog).

●● Does not cause histamine release.
●● May induce panting.

K22463_C024.indd 1039

duration.

Fentanyl
●● Rapid onset of action (2–3 minutes).
●● Short duration of action.

Butorphanol

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1040

Elements of therapy

Buprenorphine
●● Agonist (strong for mu receptor)–antagonist (kappa
receptor).

●● Less analgesia than morphine, ceiling effect.
●● Slow onset (40–60 minutes), long acting (8–12 hours).
●● Affinity for mu receptor makes reversal more
difficult.

●● Most popular opioid used in small animal practice
in the UK.
●● Oral transmucosal administration very effective in
the cat.
●● Considered by some to be the best opioid investigated
in the cat.

Codeine
●● ‘International standard’ weak opioid.
●● Approximately 9% of Caucasians lack enzyme to provide analgesia – relevance in animals unknown.

●● Substantially improves analgesia of nonopioids
(e.g. NSAIDs).

Tramadol
●● 40% activity at the mu receptor, 60% as serotonin

●●

●●
●●
●●

●●

and noradrenaline neuronal reuptake inhibitor
(monoaminergic).
Reduces synovial fluid concentrations of substance P and interleukin-6 in human patients with
knee osteoarthritis.
Augments analgesia of opioids and NSAIDs.
Bioavailability is about 65%, with a short half-life
(<1.7 hours) in dogs; 62% (4.8 hours) in cats.
Simulated oral dosing regimens at 5 mg/kg q6h and
2.5 mg/kg q4h are predicted to produce tramadol and
M1 levels consistent with analgesia in humans.
No safety or efficacy data are available for use in dogs
or cats.

ALPHA-2 AGONISTS
The prototypical alpha-2 adrenergic agonist used in veterinary medicine has been xylazine. Since its introduction
in 1962, xylazine has been used, mostly in ruminants, as
Domitor
Dextro-enantiomer

Active

K22463_C024.indd 1040

an anesthetic or anesthetic adjuvant. The newer alpha-2
adrenergic agonist medetomidine has gained acceptance
in companion animal practice. Medetomidine is an equal
mixture of two optical enantiomers, of which dexmedetomidine is a potent alpha-2 agonist, while levomedetomidine is pharmacologically inactive. Medetomidine has
a high affinity for the alpha-2 receptor, with an alpha-2/
alpha-1 binding ratio of 1,620, compared with ratios of
260, 220, and 160 for detomidine, clonidine, and xylazine, respectively. Currently, administering large doses of
alpha-2 agonists as monoanesthetic agents is uncommon,
but it is commonly accepted that low doses are very useful
when used as adjuncts in a balanced analgesic protocol.
Since its USA launch in 2007, medetomidine has been
phased out (in the USA) and replaced by dexmedetomidine. Dexmedetomidine is the dextrorotary enantiomer
of the racemic mixture medetomidine (Figure 24.14). It
is approximately twice as potent as medetomidine in
terms of its ability to produce sedation and analgesia.
Dexmedetomidine is supplied as a 0.5 mg/ml solution,
which allows clinicians to use the same injection volume
as medetomidine because the dexmedetomidine dilution
has the same potency as medetomidine.
One mechanism of alpha-2 agonist action is the inhibition of adenylate cyclase. Decreased availability of
intracellular cAMP attenuates the stimulation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase and, hence, the phosphorylation
of target regulatory proteins. In addition alpha-2 adrenoceptor activation of G-protein-gated potassium channels results in membrane hyperpolarization, causing a
decrease in the firing rate of excitable cells in the CNS.
Presynaptic alpha-2 adrenoceptors secrete noradrenaline, which binds with postsynaptic adrenoceptors
to stimulate target cell response governing autonomic
functions.
Alpha-2 agonists produce rapid sedation by selectively
binding to alpha-2 adrenoceptors in the neuron, inhibiting the release of noradrenaline necessary for neurotransmission (Figure 24.15).
Dense populations of alpha-2 adrenoceptors are concentrated in the mammalian spinal cord dorsal horn, both preand postsynaptically, on non-noradrenergic nociceptive
Dexdomitor

Levo-enantiomer

Inactive

Dextro-enantiomer

Active

24.14

Figure 24.14 Dexmedetomidone
provides sedation and analgesia
using only the active enantiomer
of medetomidine.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

Sympathetic neuron
Presynaptic
alpha-2 adrenoceptors

Presynaptic
alpha-2 adrenoceptors
α2
α2
α2 α α2
2

Noradrenaline
release

Synapse

1041

24.15

Noradrenaline
release is blocked

Target cell
Postsynaptic
adrenoceptors

neurons. On presynaptic alpha-2 adrenoceptors, when
G0 ­proteins are activated, a decrease in calcium influx is
mediated, leading to decreased release of neurotransmitters and/or neuropeptides, including glutamate, vasoactive intestinal peptide, CGRP, substance P, and neurotensin.
At postsynaptic alpha-2 adrenoceptors, Gi protein-coupled
potassium channels produce neuronal hyperpolarization that dampens ascending nociceptive transmission,
thereby producing p
­ostsynaptically-mediated spinal
analgesia. The sedative–hypnotic effects are apparently
mediated by activation of s­ upraspinal alpha-2 adrenoceptors located in the brainstem, where there is a relatively
high density of alpha-2 agonist binding sites.
Potential side-effects include:

●● Sedation, muscle relaxation, and anxiolysis.
●● Short-duration hypertension accompanied by a com●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

pensatory baroreceptor-mediated reflex bradycardia.
Decreased respiratory rate, but with a maintained
arterial pH, PaO2, and PaCO2.
Both cats and dogs will vomit: cats (90%) more than
dogs (20%).
GI atony with possible gas accumulation.
Increased urinary output.
Transient hypoinsulinemia and hyperglycemia have
been reported in dogs.

The data in Table 24.5 are from an educational
­demonstration in a live dog, demonstrating the physiologic responses to the α2-agonist medetomidine, the anticholinergic atropine, and the reversal agent antipamezol.

Alpha-2 agonists at-a-glance
●● Not first-line analgesic agents, but excellent analgesic
adjuncts.

●● At low dosages, both sedation and analgesia are dose
dependent.

●● Ceiling effect at higher dosages.
●● Co-administration with anticholinergics is contro-

Postsynaptic
adrenoceptors

Figure 24.15 Noradrenaline
release is inhibited by alpha-2
agonist administration.

●● Inclusion in a premedication protocol markedly
reduces the required dose of induction agents.

●● Up to 20% of dogs and 90% of cats will vomit after
●●
●●
●●

●●
●●

●●

administration.
Increased urine output is reported in both dogs
and cats.
Transient hypoinsulinemia and hyperglycemia are
reported in dogs.
Alpha-2 agonists are sedative–analgesics, not anesthetics; therefore, under their influence, caution the
possibility that the animal may still bite.
Reflex bradycardia and bradyarrhythmias are not
uncommon. Heart rate may decrease by 50%.
Blood pressure may fall by one-quarter to one-third
and cardiac output may decrease by one-third to onehalf of baseline value.
Should be avoided in animals with compromising
cardiovascular disease.

MEMBRANE STABILIZERS (LOCAL
ANESTHETICS, TRICYCLIC
ANTIDEPRESSANTS, SEROTONIN
REUPTAKE INHIBITORS)
It is likely that an individual patient has neuropathic pain
as a result of many underlying mechanisms. However,
there may be a dominant mechanism that, when treated,
reduces pain to a tolerable level. For example, if it can be
demonstrated that ectopic impulse generators (due to
abnormal sodium channel activity and located in injured
or abnormally functioning primary afferent fibers) are
generating increased traffic entering CNS pathways,
treatment with a Na+ channel-blocking agent that reduces
ectopic firing may dramatically reduce pain. Mechanismbased pain management is an area of intense research.
This includes reducing transmitter release in pro-nociceptive neurons by opiates or α2δ calcium ­channelbinding drugs, by inhibiting postsynaptic excitatory

versial.

K22463_C024.indd 1041

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1042

Elements of therapy

Table 24.5 Data demonstrating the physiologic responses to the alpha-2 agonist medetomidine, the anticholinergic atropine, and
the reversal agent antipamezol.

Heart
rate
(bpm)
[70–110]

Mean BP
(mmHg)
[60–100]

Cardiac
output
(l/min)
[2.5–6]

O2 saturation
(%)
[95–100]

Mucous
membrane
color
[pink, CRT
1–3 sec]

PaO2
(mmHg)
[500–600]

PaCO2
(mmHg)
[40–55]

Resp rate
(breaths/min)
[6–20]

91

76

2.95

98

Pink, fast

575

52

20

+ 5 min

49

96

1.33

93

Pale, slow

630

55

24

+ 15 min

50

90

1.36

95

Pinker, slow

563

54

18

+ 3 min

77

125

1.45

100

Pink, faster

602

59

13

Antipamezol
administration
(50 mcg/kg IM)

77

125

+ 1 min

86

147

1.56

99

Pink, fast

X

X

15

+ 5 min

89

96

2.3

98

Pink, fast

597

54

12

Baseline (1.1%
isof lurane)
Medetomidine
administration
(10 mcg/kg IM)

Anticholinergic
(atropine)
administration
(0.04 mg/kg IV)

100

Note: Numbers in square brackets represent the normal reference intervals for each parameter.

receptors such as the NMDA or AMPA/kainate receptors,
by potentiating inhibitory transmitters through reduced
transmitter uptake or by agonist administration, and by
use-dependent Na+ channel-blockers.
Trafficking, upregulation and downregulation, and
even functional modulation of Na+ channels, constitute
major modes of action in neuropathic membrane remodeling and hyperexcitability, with K+ channels playing an
important role. Many drugs that block Na+ channels are
available for clinical use. Local anesthetics are most widely
used (e.g. lidocaine and bupivacaine). The inflammatory
phase of wound healing typically lasts approximately
72 hours and this is the period that has been recommended
as the ­minimum amount of time analgesics should be
provided following surgery; however local, infiltrative
lidocaine typically lasts no more than 120 minutes and
bupivacaine no more than 360 minutes. Recognizing the
need for a long-acting local anesthetic, a bupivacaine liposomal injectable suspension has been developed (Aratana
Therapeutics) that is promising to provide 72 hours of local
analgesic efficacy following intraoperative tissue infiltration. When applied at high concentrations to a nerve,
impulse c­onduction and pain stop when the impulse

K22463_C024.indd 1042

originates distal to the application site. This is effective
for both nociceptive and neuropathic pain. Low concentrations of lidocaine (two to three orders of magnitude lower
than those required to block normal impulse propagation)
selectively suppress subthreshold oscillations and ectopic
neuroma and DRG discharge, with similar CNS activity.
Such sensitivity to sodium channel ­blockage is the basis
for these drugs to be given systemically w
­ ithout serious ­toxicity from failure of normal neuronal conduction of
the cardiovascular and nervous systems.
A problem with systemic lidocaine is its short duration
of action and the need for it to be administered IV. This
first issue is solved by anticonvulsants, whose mode of
action is sodium channel blockade. Another option is tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). For many years, drugs with
a characteristic tricyclic structure (Figure 24.16) have
been used to treat depression. Imipramine was among
the first in its class and only a few years after its introduction in 1958, its analgesic properties were identified.
Nowadays, TCAs are the mainstay for treatment of neuropathic pain. Although treatment of neuropathic pain
with TCAs in humans is evidence based, it is not clear
how these drugs actually relieve pain. Most research is

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

based on their ability to inhibit presynaptic reuptake of
norepinephrine and serotonin, but these drugs also act
as NMDA-receptor antagonists and apparently block ion
channels. Amitriptyline is best known as an inhibitor of
catecholamine reuptake, although it is also a strong local
anesthetic and is likely to relieve neuropathic pain by
suppressing ectopic discharge.
Anticonvulsants are a category of medications grouped
together based only on their ability to suppress epileptic
seizures. Anticonvulsants together with ­antiarrhythmics
can be looked on as sodium channel or other channel neuronal activity regulators. Evidence firmly supports that anticonvulsants and local anesthetic drugs
relieve neuropathic pain. Based on number needed to
treat (NNT) calculations, gabapentin is comparable with
TCAs for neuropathic pain and is used more frequently
than any other anticonvulsant for human chronic pain.
Gabapentin has demonstrated analgesic efficacy for
human patients with painful diabetic neuropathy and
postherpetic neuralgia, with NNT calculations of 3.8 and

1043

3.2, respectively. Gabapentin was developed as an analog of the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA), but it has since been shown not to interact with
either GABAA or GABAB receptors. Although not a sodium
channel-blocker, gabapentin depresses ectopic discharge
by suppression of Ca2+ conductance. Its mode of action is
associated with binding to the α2δ site on voltage-gated
calcium channels (Figure 24.17).
The newer nontricyclic antidepressants, such as selective SRIs, antidepressants that alter both serotonergic
and noradrenergic neurotransmission, and noradrenaline (a selective antidepressant), have preferential use in
human medicine because of better tolerability; however,
their efficacy for neuropathic pain relief is not convincing. Apparently, anticonvulsants that act synaptically
(e.g. barbiturates) are nonanalgesic, while membrane
stabilizing anticonvulsants are effective analgesics.
Corticosteroids also have membrane stabilizing properties, which may be a major mechanism of pain control
when depot form corticosteroids are injected.
Topical forms of the TCA doxepin, gabapentin, lidocaine, and bupivacaine are now available on the human
market, as well as ketamine.

24.16

Membrane stabilizers at-a-glance
(selected agents)
Local anesthetics
●● The amide link (lidocaine, bupivacaine) or ester link

N

HCL

(procaine, benzocaine) for the different local anesthetics determines the drug disposition within the body:
●● Metabolism of ester-linked local anesthetics is
primarily by enzymatic hydrolysis in the plasma
of nonspecific pseudocholinesterases.

CH2CH2CH2NCH3
CH3

Figure 24.16 Typical structure of tricyclic antidepressants.
H2N CO2H
H2N

Gabapentin

H

CO2H
CH3

24.17
(Binding site)

α

CH3

Pregabalin

α1

γ
I

II

δ
III
IV

II–III
β

Figure 24.17 The gabapentin-specific binding site is the α2δ subunit of voltage-dependent calcium channels, with the highest
affinity for α2δ1 subtype. Gabapentin can inhibit high-threshold calcium currents in cultured sensory neurons and inhibits excitatory
amino acid release through its interaction with the calcium channels. Gabapentin also interacts with the NMDA receptor complex at
the glycine site.

K22463_C024.indd 1043

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1044

Elements of therapy

●● Amide local anesthetics are metabolized primarily in the liver.

●● Local anesthetics are weak bases, and the predomi-

●●

●●

●●

●●

●●

●●

nant form of the compound in solution at physiologic
pH is the ionized or cationic form.
At clinical doses vasodilation is present, whereas at
low concentrations local anesthetics tend to cause
vasoconstriction.
Adding a vasoconstrictor to the local anesthetic
decreases local perfusion, delays the rate of vascular absorption, and prolongs anesthetic action.
Epinephrine (5 µg/ml or 1:200,000) is commonly used
for such a response.
Bupivacaine extended-release injectable suspension
for managing postoperative pain in cats and dogs
following surgery has been developed. This product
consists of multivesicular liposomes encapsulating
aqueous bupivacaine that is gradually released over
96 hours. Administration can be associated with mild
granulomatous inflammation of adipose tissue at the
injection site.
There are currently no data to enlighten the concept
of mixing local anesthetics (e.g. short onset and duration agent with a different agent of long onset and
duration).
Harmful side-effects are usually associated with accidental IV administration or vascular absorption of
large amounts of anesthetic after aggressive regional
administration. (Note: Always aspirate before injecting. Bupivacaine can cause cardiac dysrhythmias and
ventricular fibrillation if injected IV.)
Clinical applications:
●● Local infiltration – soaker catheters.
●● Topical anesthesia.
●● Intravenous block.
●● Epidural block.
●● Spinal (supra-arachnoid) block.
●● Peripheral nerve block.

●●
●●
●●

●●
●●
●●

●●
●●

●●
●●
●●

preparation. It is well absorbed in the GI tract and
excreted relatively unchanged in urine.
The pharmacology of amantadine in dogs and cats
has not been well established.
In humans, amantadine has been used for neuropathic pain.
Amantadine is used in veterinary patients for allodynia and opioid tolerance, allowing lower opioid doses
and complementing the opioid analgesia.
Amantadine is available as 100 mg capsules and a
10 mg/ml elixir.
The feline toxic dose of amantadine is 30 mg/kg.
As an NMDA-antagonist, amantadine does not alter
nociceptive thresholds; therefore, it does not produce
analgesia, but assists other drugs analgesic response
by blocking ‘facilitation’ (Figure 24.18).
Behavioral side-effects from amantadine in dogs and
cats begin at 15 mg/kg PO.
Methadone and dextromethorphan are opioid
derivatives. Both are weak, noncompetitive NMDA
antagonists.
Methadone also functions as a norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor.
Parenteral formulations of dextromethorphan are
currently unavailable.
Methadone is commonly used for cancer pain in
human patients because of its high oral bioavailability, rapid onset, and time to peak analgesic effect, as
well as the relatively long duration of activity.

Gabapentin
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●

Originally introduced as an antiepileptic drug.
Has no analgesic effect at GABA receptors.
Well suited for neuropathic pain.
Is highly bioavailable in dogs.
Is metabolized by the liver and excreted almost
exclusively by the kidneys. T1/2 is approximately
3–4 hours.

NMDA-antagonists (ketamine,
tiletamine, amantadine, methadone,
dextromethorphan)

NONSTEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY
DRUGS

●● Ketamine acts both centrally and peripherally at mul-

In most respects NSAIDs can be characterized as a class;
however, there are molecule-specific characteristics.
NSAIDs manifest their mode of action in the arachidonic
acid (AA) cascade (Figure 24.19). AA is a ubiquitous substrate derived from the continual degradation of cell
membranes. Corticosteroids act at this step. Because corticosteroids have their mode of action at a location higher
in the arachidonic cascade than NSAIDs, it is redundant
to use them concurrently; doing so markedly increases
the potential for adverse reactions.

tiple receptor sites, including NMDA, opioid, AMPA,
kainate, and GABAA receptors.
●● Oral administration of ketamine produces few
adverse effects and may be more effective than SC
administration.
●● Microdoses of ketamine have few if any side-­effects,
and its best use is with an analgesic such as an opioid.
●● Amantadine was originally developed as an antiviral
drug for use in humans and is available as an oral

K22463_C024.indd 1044

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

1045

24.18

Dorsal horn neuron
CGRP
sP

CGRP
NK-1
AMPA

Glu

Activate

Primary
afferent
neuron

NMDA

Nociception

Hyperalgesia

Spinothalamic tract

Facilitate

Opioid

Figure 24.18 NMDA-mediated
windup facilitates the underlying
nociceptive signaling, resulting in
a state of hyperalgesia. Therefore,
NMDA-antagonists (amantadine) are
administered as ‘adjuncts’ to a baseline
protocol for optimal results.

Windup

Hypersensitivity

Inhibition

Chemotaxis
Immune reactions
Inflammation
Pain
Allergies and asthma

24.19
Phospholipids

Phospholipases

Glycerol
Lipoxygenase

Inflammation
Exogenous chemical
metabolism
Steroid biosynthesis
Cholesterol catabolism
Vascular tone
modulation
Glomerular dynamics
Apoptosis inhibition
Mitogenesis regulation

Leukotrienes
Lipoxins

Arachidonic acid
Cyclo-oxygenase

P450

Injury

Inhibition site of
corticosteroids
Inhibition site of NSAIDs
and acetaminophen

PGG2
Epoxides

Cyclo-oxygenase
PGH2

PGI2

PGE1

PGE2

Different
synthases and
isomerases

TXA1
PGD2

Pain
PGF2α

Inflammation
Pro-oncogenesis
Antiplatelet
aggregation

TXA2

Vasoconstriction

Vasodilation

Vasoconstriction

Temperature

Pro-platelet
aggregation

Fever

Gl protection

Wakefulness

Sleep

Gastrointestinal motility control
Bronchodilation

Bronchoconstriction

Vasodilation
Penile erection

Uterine contraction

Figure 24.19 Arachidonic acid cascade.

K22463_C024.indd 1045

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1046

Elements of therapy

Approximately 20 years following discovery of the AA
pathway as the mode of action for aspirin, it was discovered that the COX enzyme exists in the form of at least
two isoenzymes: COX-1 and COX-2 (Figure 24.20). Early
thinking was that COX-1-mediated prostaglandins were
constitutively physiologic and should be retained, while
COX-2-mediated prostaglandins were pathologic and
should be eliminated for the control of inflammation and
pain. COX-2-selective NSAIDs were designed with this in
mind (i.e. the selective suppression of COX-2-mediated
prostaglandins) (Figure 24.21).

COX-1:COX-2 ratios vary depending on laboratory
techniques and although finite ratios may vary among
investigators, relative ratio standings provide an insight
as to a drug’s expected COX activity (Figures 24.22-24.25).
However, the optimal ratio is unknown, and too large a
ratio is likely detrimental. While the clinical relevance
of optimal COX-2 selectivity is open to debate, the importance of COX-1-sparing is well established.
COX ratios are also species dependent (i.e. ratios in
the dog cannot be applied to the cat). Furthermore, all
marketing information relative to COX data carries the

24.20

24.21

Figure 24.20 The COX-1 receptor site (left) differs from
the COX-2 receptor site (right) by only a couple of amino
acids; however, the COX-2 site has a larger entry port and
a characteristic side pocket. Small, traditional NSAIDs fit
into both sites, blocking both COX-1- and COX-2-mediated
prostaglandin production from arachidonic acid (white sticks),
hence the term nonselective NSAIDs.

Figure 24.21 Coxib-class NSAIDs were designed to be too large
for the COX-1 receptor site (at labeled dose); however, they fit
hand-in-glove within the COX-2 receptor site. These drugs spare
COX-1-mediated prostaglandin production and block COX-2mediated prostaglandin production (i.e. they are COX-1 sparing
and COX-2 selective).

24.22

24.23

Drug

Ratio of IC50
COX-1/COX-2

Drug

Ratio of IC50
COX-1/COX-2

Meloxicam
Carprofen
Ketoprofen

12.2
1.8
0.4

Meloxicam
Carprofen
Ketoprofen

10
9
6.5

Drug

Ratio of IC50
COX-1/COX-2

Drug

Ratio of IC50
COX-1/COX-2

Meloxicam
Carprofen
Ketoprofen
Aspirin

2.7
16.8
0.2
0.4

Carprofen
Celecoxib
Deracoxib
Firocoxib

5
6.2
36.5
155

24.24

K22463_C024.indd 1046

24.25

Figures 24.22–24.25 COX-1:COX-2 ratios.
(24.22) From Kay-Mugford P, Benn SJ,
LaMarre J et al. (2000) In vitro effects of
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on
cyclooxygenase activity in dogs. Am J Vet
Res 61:802–809. (24.23) From Brideau C,
Van Staden C, Chan CC (2001) In vitro effects
of cyclooxygenase inhibitors in whole
blood of horses, dogs, and cats. Am J Vet Res
62:1755–1760. (24.24) From Streppa HK,
Jones CJ, Budsberg SC (2002) Cyclooxygenase
selectivity of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs in canine blood. Am J Vet Res 63:91–94.
(24.25) From Li J, Lynch MP, DeMello KL
et al. (2005) In vitro and in vivo profile of
2-(3-di-fluoromethyl-5-phenylpyrazol1-yl)-5-methanesulfonylpyridine, a
potent, selective, and orally active canine
COX-2 inhibitor. Bioorg Medicinal Chem
13:1805–1809.

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

disclaimer, ‘clinical relevance undetermined’. This is
because all these data are determined in vitro. One study
reported an assessment of the in-vivo action of NSAIDs in
the region of the GI tract, which appears to be at greatest
risk for ulceration in the dog. Findings from this study
suggest that different NSAIDs reduce protective prostanoid production to a different degree in the canine pylorus and duodenum, and this appears to relate to their
COX selectivity.
Some authors suggest a COX-1:COX-2 ratio of <1 would
be considered COX-1 selective, a ratio of >1 as COX-2
­preferential, a ratio of >100 as COX-2 selective, and a ratio
of >1,000 as COX-2 specific. Selectivity nomenclature is
used loosely and comparative ranking has not been associated with clinical relevance.
It is now recognized that the ‘good-guy COX-1’,
‘bad-guy-COX-2’ approach is naïve; COX-2 is needed
­
constitutively for reproduction, CNS nociception, renal
function, and GI lesion repair. In fact, the physiologic functions associated with COX activity overlap. Accordingly,
there is a limit as to how COX-2 selective an NSAID can
be without causing problems (e.g. inhibiting the repair
of a gastric lesion). However, this limit is not known. In
addition, it is logical to avoid a COX-1-selective NSAID
(ratio <1) perioperatively so as not to enhance bleeding.
­Coxib-class NSAIDs were not designed to be more safe for
either hepatic or renal function. They were designed specifically to provide an improved GI safety profile over traditional NSAIDs, particularly in high-risk patients, and
this has been demonstrated in human studies. Finally, it
is fortunate that dogs are not a risk for coxib-class NSAID
­cardiovascular problems, primarily because they are not
a species that experiences atherosclerosis. It may well be
that the canine is the optimal target species for this class
of drugs.

to the appropriate authority and drug manufacturer so
that general trends can be tracked.
ADE reports to the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) Center for Veterinary Medicine provide
some insights as to why ADEs from NSAID use might be
so high:

●● 23% of owners: veterinarian never discussed any
adverse effects of the medication.
●● 22%: veterinarian did not issue client information
sheet provided by pharmaceutical company.
●● 14%: dispensed NSAID in other than original
packaging.
●● 4%: preadministration blood analyses not performed.
As a class of drug, NSAIDs are most commonly associated
with adverse reactions in the GI tract (Table 24.6), renal
system, and liver. GI problems associated with NSAIDs
can be as benign as regurgitation or as serious as gastric
ulceration and perforation. Vomition has been identified
as the most frequent clinical sign associated with gastric
perforation. Owners should be informed that if their pet
experiences vomiting while taking an NSAID, the drug
should be stopped and the patient rechecked. This is a
conservative approach since dogs are considered a ‘vomiting species’ and some NSAIDs are associated with more
vomiting than others.
Gastric perforations are most frequently found near
the gastric pylorus and have a poor prognosis if not discovered early and treated aggressively. Risk factors identified with NSAID-associated gastric ulceration are most
Table 24.6 Gastrointestinal adverse events reported in clinical
trials for US Registration.

Safety
The comparative safety of different NSAIDs in dogs is
difficult to determine. Such a query compares the incidence of problems with one NSAID with that for a second NSAID. Incidence is a ratio consisting of the number
of dogs with problems (numerator) over the number
of dogs treated with that drug at a given point in time
(denominator). Not all adverse drug events (ADEs) are
reported and not all reported events are directly causal,
therefore the numerator is unknown. The denominator is
also unknown, because it is impossible to determine the
number of dogs on a drug at any given time. For these
reasons, accurate comparative data are unobtainable.
Accordingly, most NSAID manufacturers can state with
credibility, that ‘no NSAID has been proved safer than (fill
in the blank)’. Nevertheless, all ADEs should be reported

K22463_C024.indd 1047

1047

Drug

Vomiting

Diarrhea

Carprofen

3.1% (3.8)

3.1% (3.8)

Etodolac

4.3% (1.7)

2.6% (1.7)

Deracoxib

2.9% (3.8)

2.9% (1.9)

Tepoxalin

2.0% (4.8) at
7 days
19.6% at 28 days

4.0% (0) at 7 days
21.5% at 28 days

Meloxicam

25.5% (15.4)

12.1% (7.4)

Firocoxib

3.9% (6.6)

0.8% (8.3)

Values represent mean of test article (placebo).
Data sourced from drug inserts. Caution should be used in
comparing adverse events among different drugs because of
­differences in study populations, data collection methods, and
reporting methods.
*

**

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1048

Elements of therapy

commonly seen with inappropriate use: (1) overdosing;
(2) concurrent use of multiple NSAIDs; and (3) concurrent
use of NSAIDs with corticosteroids. ‘Postmarketing’ data
suggests that 70–80% of NSAID ADEs can be eliminated by
‘responsible’ NSAID use.
COX-2-selective NSAIDs have been embraced in an
effort to gain greater NSAID safety (greater suppression of
pain and inflammation (COX-2), but with ­COX-1-sparing);
however, it is now appreciated that COX-2 can be associated with some level of constitutive homeostasis, specifically in the GI tract. This renders the selection of any
contemporary NSAID an unknown quantity relative to
GI risk. For example: COX-2-mediated prostaglandins
are important in the repair of gastric ulcers, supressing
ulcer progression to perforation. Therefore, placing a dog
on a C
­ OX-2-selective/specific NSAID could exacerbate the
risk for an adverse response in the event that the dog
had an ulcer at risk for perforation. GI perforations can
be life-­threatening and dogs predisposed are virtually
­impossible to diagnose, especially given an underappreciation of stress related to hospitalizations and treatments.
Mechanism-based investigation as to the clinical manifestation of pain subsequent to nociceptor response to
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has revealed four receptor subtypes for PGE2: EP1–4. EP4 has been identified as a major
player in the pain pathway. In 2013, the WHO defined
a newly recognized class of drug that acts as a prostaglandin receptor antagonist (PRA) – the piprant class. A
first-in-class selective EP4 PRA, analgesic, and anti-inflammatory has recently been developed. This drug
is proposed to suppress pain and inflammation, while
sparing other homeostatic, ­COX-dependent physiologic
functions.

Washout
Since NSAID manufacturers (and the US FDA) warn
against concurrent NSAID administration, practitioners
switching patients from one NSAID to another often find
themselves addressing the issue of ‘appropriate washout’
between different NSAIDs. There are no published peer-­
reviewed scientific studies that define what constitutes an
adequate washout period when switching a dog from one
NSAID to another. In the absence of scientific evidence,
some pharmacologists offer washout guidelines that are
based on NSAID serum half-life data (i.e. 5–10 half-lives
of the drug). However, an NSAID’s tissue effect may not
mirror its serum half-life, therefore such guidance should
be taken with caution.
Reasons for changing NSAIDs fall into two classes:
lack of efficacy and drug intolerance. When efficacy is
the issue, a short washout (perhaps five half-lives) may

K22463_C024.indd 1048

be acceptable, bridging the interval with other class
drugs. When switching NSAIDs because of intolerance,
an extended washout period may be necessary, the minimum period being resolution of the clinical signs associated with the intolerance. Decisions regarding washout
duration must be tailored to individual patients and
include the following factors:

●●
●●
●●
●●

Patient health status.
Concurrent medications.
Previous NSAID experience.
Personalized benefit versus risk assessment.

It is important to involve the owner in the patient’s benefit:risk assessment, ensuring that the owner understands:

●●
●●
●●
●●

What to expect from the medication.
Medication dose and dosing interval.
Potential side-effects.
Inappropriate concurrent medications (e.g. aspirin
and other over-the-counter medications).
●● What action to take if side-effects are seen.
Such information should be provided to the owner verbally and in writing and documented in the patient’s
medical record.

Aspirin
Aspirin presents unique risk factors to the canine
patient. Aspirin is both topically (to the GI mucosa)
and systemically toxic (even at low doses of 5 mg/kg
q24h), chondrodestructive, causes irreversible platelet
acetylation, and is potentially associated with GI bleeding of approximately 3 ml/day. The American Medical
Association reports that 16,500 people die each year
associated with aspirin ­toxicity (Table 24.7), yet pet
owners often consider it benign because it is available
over-the-counter and the media suggest it is safe. Even
low-dose aspirin has consistently been associated with
GI petechiation and hemorrhage. In most countries,
aspirin does not have a license for use in the dog. In
theory, since aspirin causes GI lesions, it would be inappropriate to sequentially progress from aspirin to a
strongly COX-2-selective NSAID (which might restrict
the COX-2 necessary for repair) without an adequate
washout period following the aspirin. It is also dangerous to use aspirin together with another NSAID or
corticosteroid.
Development of gastric mucosal hemorrhage, erosion,
and ulceration associated with the administration of aspirin is largely attributed to reduction of prostaglandin E

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

Table 24.7 Risk factors for NSAID-induced complications
(humans).

Prior clinical GI event
(ulcer/complication)

2.4–4 times

Advanced age (65+)

2–3.5 times

Concomitant
­anticoagulation
therapy

3 times

Concurrent
c­ orticosteroid use

2 times

synthesis in the gastric mucosa. In addition, aspirin can
cause direct cellular toxicosis independently of the inhibition of PG synthesis. Standard formulations of buffered
aspirin have been shown not to provide sufficient buffering to neutralize gastric acid or to prevent mucosal
injury. Enteric-coated aspirin causes less gastric injury
in humans compared with that from administration of
unbuffered or buffered aspirin, but absorption is quite
variable. Complications of administering aspirin together
with another NSAID/corticosteroid reside in the suppression of aspirin-triggered lipoxin, an endogenous protective mechanism in both humans and dogs, with resultant
enhancement of systemic toxicity.

High-dose NSAID or
multiple NSAID use

2–4 times

Gastrointestinal protectants

Major co-morbidity
(e.g. heart disease)

variable

Estimated
increased risk
Established

Probable

1049

Long-term NSAID use
Coexisting H. pylori
infection
Dyspepsia caused by an
NSAID

One goal of anti-ulcer treatment is to lower intragastric acidity in order to prevent further destruction of
the GI tract mucosa (Table 24.8); this enhances ulcer
repair. Cimetidine (a histamine, H2-receptor blocker)
is commonly used, although its inhibition of the CYP
450 enzyme system may preclude its use in some cases.
Cimetidine requires dosing 3–4 times daily and it is not
effective in preventing NSAID-induced gastric ulceration.
The adverse reactions of cimetidine mimic those of gastritis and ulcerations.

Table 24.8 Pharmacologic agents for NSAID gastrointestinal prophylaxis and treatment.

Group

Generic name

Brand
name

Proton pump
inhibitors

Omeprazole

Prilosec

Lansoprazole

PrevAcid

Rabeprazole

AcipHex

Pantoprazole

Protonix

Esomeprazole

Nexium

Prostaglandin
analog

Misoprostol

Cytotec

Canine: 2–5 µg/kg PO q8h

H2 blockers

Cimetidine

Tagamet

Canine/feline: 10 mg/kg PO, IV, or IM q8h; feline: 3.5 mg/kg PO q12h or
2.5 mg/kg IV q12h

Ranitidine

Zantac

Canine: 2 mg/kg PO or IV q8h

Famotidine

Pepcid

Canine/feline: 0.5 mg/kg PO, IV, IM, or SC q24h or 0.25 mg/kg PO, IV, IM, or
SC q12h

Nizatidine

Axid

Canine: 2.5–5 mg/kg PO q24h

Sucralfate

Carafate

Canine: 0.5–1 g PO q8–12h; feline: 0.25 g PO q8–12h

Mucosal
sealant

K22463_C024.indd 1049

Dose
Canine: 0.7 mg/kg PO. (Note: Dose for omeprazole is 0.7–1.0 mg/kg PO
q12–24h – see Chapter 8: Digestive diseases [pharynx to anorectum].)

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1050

Elements of therapy

Omeprazole is a substituted benzimidazole that acts
by inhibiting the hydrogen–potassium ATPase (proton
pump inhibitor) responsible for production of hydrogen
ions in the parietal cell. It is 5–10 times more potent than
cimetidine in inhibiting gastric acid secretion and has
a long duration of action. Omeprazole may be useful in
decreasing gastric hyperacidity, but it has minimal effect
on ulcer healing.
Misoprostol is a synthetic prostaglandin E1 analog used
to prevent gastric ulceration. It decreases gastric acid
secretion, increases bicarbonate and mucus secretion,

increases epithelial cell turnover, and increases mucosal
blood flow. Misoprostol requires dosing 3–4 times daily
and its adverse reactions mimic those of gastritis and
ulcerations.

NSAIDs with other agents
Drugs and agents that may be influenced by the concurrent administration of NSAIDs are listed in Table 24.9.
Because pet owners tend to be using more and more ‘natural’ products (Table 24.10), some of which can potentially

Table 24.9 NSAIDs: potential drug interactions.
Drug

May increase the toxicity of

May decrease the efficacy of

Toxicity may be increased by

Classical NSAIDs (clinically
significant COX-1 inhibition)

Warfarin, methotrexate,
valproic acid, midazolam,
furosemide, spironolactone,
sulfonylureas, heparin

Furosemide, thiazide, ACE
inhibitors, beta-blockers

Aminoglycosides, furosemide, cyclosporine (renal),
glucocorticoids (GI), heparin,
gingko, garlic, ginger, ginseng
(hemorrhage)

Coxibs and relatively COX-2
selective agents

Warfarin, methotrexate,
valproic acid, midazolam,
furosemide, spironolactone,
sulfonylureas

Furosemide, thiazides, ACE
inhibitors, beta-blockers

Aminoglycosides, furosemide,
cyclosporine (renal), glucocorticoids (GI)

Phenylbutazone,
acetaminophen

Warfarin, sulfonylureas

Phenobarbital, alcohol,
rifampin, metoclopramide

(Modified from Trepanier LA (2005) Potential interactions between non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and other drugs.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 15(4):248–253.)
Table 24.10 Potential herb–drug interactions.
Herb

Interacting drugs

Results

St. John’s Wort

Cyclosporine, fexofenadine, midazolam,
digoxin, tacrolimus, amitriptyline, warfarin, theophylline

Decreased plasma drug concentrations

Ginko

Warfarin, heparin, NSAIDs

Bleeding

Omeprazole

Decreased plasma concentrations

Warfarin, heparin, NSAIDs

Bleeding
Falsely elevated serum digoxin ­levels
(laboratory test interaction with
ginseng)

Opioids

Decreased analgesic effect
(laboratory test interaction with
ginseng)

Warfarin, heparin, NSAIDs

Bleeding

Ginseng

Garlic, chamomile, ginger

(Modified from Goodman L, Trepanier L (2005) Potential drug interactions with dietary supplements. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet
27(10):780–789.)

K22463_C024.indd 1050

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

influence the concurrent use of an NSAID, owners should
be asked to supply a complete listing of everything they
are giving their pet per os.

NSAID caution in cats
Salicylate toxicity in cats is well established. Cats present a unique susceptibility to NSAID toxicity because
of slow clearance and dose-dependent elimination.
Acetaminophen toxicity in cats results in methemoglobinemia, liver failure, and death. Cats are particularly
susceptible to acetaminophen toxicity due, in part, to
defective conjugation of the drug and conversion to a
reactive electrolytic metabolite.

Minimizing adverse drug events
The following guidelines will minimize risk factors for
NSAID ADEs:

●● Proper dosing.
●● Administer minimal effective dose.
●● Dispense in approved packaging together with owner
information sheets.

●● Avoid concurrent use of multiple NSAIDs and NSAIDs
with corticosteroids.

●● Refrain from use of aspirin.
●● Provide pet owners with both oral and written
instructions for responsible NSAID use.
appropriate patient chemistry/urine
profiling.
Conduct routine check-ups and chemistry profiles
for patients on chronic NSAID regimens. Do not fill
NSAID prescriptions without conducting patient
examinations.
Caution pet owners regarding supplementation with
over-the-counter NSAIDs.
Administer GI protectants for high-risk patients on
NSAIDs.
Avoid NSAID administration in puppies and pregnant animals.
NSAIDs may decrease the action of angiotensin-­
converting enzyme inhibitors and furosemide, a
consideration for patients being treated for cardiovascular disease.
Geriatric animals are more likely to be treated with
NSAIDs on a chronic schedule, therefore their ‘polypharmacy’ protocols and potentially compromised
drug clearance should be considered.
Provide sufficient hydration to surgery patients
administered NSAIDs.
Report ADEs to the product manufacturers and regulatory authorities.

●● Conduct
●●

●●
●●
●●
●●

●●

●●
●●

K22463_C024.indd 1051

1051

Recent NSAID developments
Meloxicam
Meloxicam is a member of the oxicam family of NSAIDS,
and is both COX-1-sparing and COX-2-selective. The
elixir presentation is a highly palatable, honey-based
presentation.
Since 2003, the oral (liquid) formulations of meloxicam have been licensed in the USA for use in dogs only,
with the January 2005 product insert specifically warning in bold-face type: “Do not use in cats.” An injectable
formulation for use in dogs was approved by the FDA in
November 2003, with a formulation for cats, for surgical
use only, approved in October 2004.
In the USA, per the manufacturer’s clinical instructions
as of July 2010, injectable meloxicam is indicated for operative use in felines as a single, one-time dose only, with
specific and repeated warnings not to administer a second dose. In June 2007, a new oral version of meloxicam
was licensed in Europe for the long-term relief of pain in
cats. As of June 2008, meloxicam is registered for longterm use in cats in Australia, New Zealand, and throughout Europe.
The liquid oral formulation is available as both 1.5 mg/ml
and 0.5 mg/ml, while the SC injectable solution is available
as 5 mg/ml.
Along with the introduction of new pain management
drugs over the past several years, has also come the development of new delivery forms. Meloxicam transmucosal
oral spray (OroCAM/RevitaCAM: Abbott Laboratories) is
such an example. This product is bioequivalent to the oral
suspension, but is sprayed onto the buccal and/or gingival mucosal surfaces. Dosage for the control of pain and
inflammation associated with osteoarthritis in dogs is
0.1 mg/kg q24h. The product is supplied in three vial sizes
containing 6 ml, 11 ml, and 33 ml of meloxicam solution.
Each vial has a different metered dose pump delivering a
dose of 0.25 mg, 0.5 mg, or 1.075 mg meloxicam per spray,
respectively.
In pharmacokinetic studies, maximum concentration
(Cmax) was achieved 2 hours after dosing, with a secondary
peak or shoulder seen at 8 hours. Many characteristics of
the product are similar to the oral solution; however, the
Tmax is 31% less. It is purported that the IC50 for plasma
would be exceeded within 15 minutes after administration, contrasting with 30–60 minutes for oral dosing with
the oral suspension. This product feature demonstrates
how first-pass metabolism by the liver can be avoided by
mucosal mist application.
Given the innovative delivery form of this popular
NSAID, with its COX-2 selectivity, COX-1-sparing features,
and short time to plasma Cmax, the transmucosal oral spray

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1052

Elements of therapy

24.26

More recent NSAIDs
Mavacoxib, a triangular-shaped chewable tablet, was
introduced to the European Union (EU) m
­ arket in late 2009.
The approved indication is ‘for the treatment of pain and
inflammation associated with d
­ egenerative joint d
­ isease
in dogs in cases where c­ ontinuous t­ reatment exceeding
1 month is indicated’. This NSAID has focused on the
concept of ‘stronger–longer’. Mavacoxib is a monthly
­
treatment (2 mg/kg), where the initial dose is given,
repeated 14 days later, and then monthly dosed for up to
a maximum of 7 consecutive doses (6.5 months). The most
­common side-effects noted in the European Medicines
Agency (EMEA) ­submission ­dossier were loss of appetite,
diarrhea, and vomiting (consistent with the NSAID class
of drugs).
In dogs mavacoxib is intermediately specific to COX-2,
with a COX-2:COX-1 ratio of 21.2. Mavacoxib tablets are
COX-sparing at recommended doses in dogs. The majority
of the product is excreted in the feces. The tablet contains
an artificial beef flavor (soybean origin) with desiccated
pork liver powder. An investigation into the population
pharmacokinetics of mavacoxib in osteoarthritic dogs
reported that their model predicts a typical T½ of 21 days
in 1-year-old, 10 kg laboratory dogs. The model also predicts that young adult laboratory Beagle dogs (1–2 years
of age) will have a T½ that is typically 29–39% shorter than
that of an identically sized, 10-year-old osteoarthritic
patient.
Robenacoxib is a NSAID of the coxib class that selectively inhibits COX-2 (Figure 24.26). The active substance,
robenacoxib, is a structural analog to diclofenac (Figure
24.27). Robinacoxib is approved in the EU for both cats
and dogs, while it is approved only for the cat (as of 2011)
in the USA. Within the EU, robinacoxib is available as tablets and as a solution for injection, while in the USA it is
available only as tablets for cats.
The approved EU indications are:

●● Tablets:
●● Cats: treatment of acute pain and inflammation
associated with musculoskeletal disorders at a
once daily dose of 1 mg/kg body weight for up to
6 days.
●● Dogs: treatment of pain and inflammation associated with chronic osteoarthritis at a once daily
dose of 1 mg/kg body weight as long as required
(as directed by the veterinarian).

K22463_C024.indd 1052

COX-1 inhibition (%)

will find its place in clinical practice. Dog owner acceptance of the oral spray will dictate commercial success.

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Meloxicam
Robenacoxib

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

COX-2 inhibition (%)

Figure 24.26 Inhibition percentages of COX-2 and
corresponding inhibition percentages of COX-1 for a range
of concentrations of robenacoxib in the cat. Dotted lines
indicate cut-off values for inhibition of COX-1 (20% inhibition
of COX-1 = percentage above which a risk of side-effects is
assumed) and COX-2 (80% inhibition for COX-2 = percentage
above which a good therapeutic effect is expected). Data for
meloxicam, generated in a previous investigation, are included
for comparison. (From Giraudel JM, Toutain PL, King JN et al.
(2009) Differential inhibition of cyclooxygenase isoenzymes
in the cat by the NSAID robenacoxib. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 32:31–40.)

H
O

24.27

O

CI

CI

H
N

NH
OH
O

F

F

F

F

Figure 24.27 Molecular structure of diclofenac (left) and
robenacoxib (right).

●● Solution for injection (single SC dose of 2 mg/kg, both
dog and cat):
●● Cats: treatment of pain and inflammation associated with soft tissue surgery.
●● Dogs: treatment of pain and inflammation
­associated with orthopedic or soft tissue surgery.
The approved USA indication is:

●● Tablets:
●● Cats: treatment for the control of postoperative
pain and inflammation associated with orthopedic surgery, ovariohysterectomy, and castration in

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

cats ≥5.5 lbs (2.5 kg) and ≥6 months of age; 1 mg/kg
once daily for up to a maximum of 3 days.
●● Preoperatively: administer approximately
30 minutes prior to surgery.
●● Postoperatively: tablets may be given with or
without food.
●● Dogs: not approved in the USA.
●● Solution for injection: not approved in the USA.
No antimicrobial preservative is added to the injectable
multidose preparation. Ethanol is present to enhance
the preservative efficacy. The artificial beef flavor is only
contained in the dog formulation and is sourced from
desiccated pork liver powder and not of ruminant origin,
associated with a risk of spongiform encephalopathy. Tmax
for the cat is 1 hour and 0.5 hours for SC injection and
oral administration. The same is true for the dog. The
systemic bioavailability of robenacoxib tablets is 49% in
cats without food. In dogs, the average systemic bioavailability of robenacoxib tablets is 62% with food and 84%
without food. Bioavailability was 88% after SC injection.
The drug is rapidly metabolized by the liver in both cats
and dogs. Robenacoxib is excreted predominately via the
biliary route (65–70%) in both dogs and cats, with the
remainder via the kidneys. Consistently, robenacoxib has
shown no inferiority to meloxicam, with a suggestion of
improved safety based on inhibition of COX-1.

Radiosynoviorthesis
In the USA alone, there are an estimated 16.6 million
dogs with some degree of osteoarthritis (OA), the most
common canine musculoskeletal disease. The first choice
and most efficacious therapy is use of NSAIDs by the
oral route. However, most NSAIDs require daily dosing
and are primarily symptom-modifying agents. Injection
into synovial joint spaces with therapeutic chemicals is
a well-established therapeutic modality in equine medicine and human health that utilizes corticosteroids, local
anesthetics, hyaluronic acid, and other compounds for
inflammation reduction and symptom control. An ideal
treatment for OA would be cost-effective, require few or a
single administration, be administered locally (avoiding
side-effects resulting from systemic administration), be
administered in the veterinary clinic (eliminating compliance issues), modify the disease rather than simply
improve symptoms, and provide prolonged relief.
Radiosynoviorthesis is a well-accepted therapeutic
procedure outside the USA, involving the injection of
a radioisotope into the joint synovial space, targeting
inflammatory mediators to reduce inflammation and pain.

K22463_C024.indd 1053

1053

All previously existing isotopes have limitations: (1) adjacent tissue damage; (2) joint leakage resulting in systemic
distribution and distant adverse effects; (3) costly, with
difficulty in manufacturing and shipping restrictions; and
(4) lack of USA approval for any condition. R-NAV proprietary homogeneous tin-117m colloid technology is free of
these limitations, with a mode of action that eliminates
the macrophages contributing to the inflammation associated with rheumatoid arthritis and OA.

SUMMARY (SEE ALSO TABLE 24.11)
Opioid analgesics have provided the most consistent
and effective analgesia for many years and are still the
best drugs available for pain control in small animals.
It is frequently said that one cannot implement ‘serious’ pain management without the availability of opioids. Opioids are the cornerstone of perioperative pain
management, where they are commonly supplemented
with other classes of drugs such as alpha-2 agonists and
NSAIDs. The actual agents administered within these
classes of drugs are patient-dependent. Selection criteria
include the patient disease state, concurrent drug administration, delivery form, duration of effect, potential for
­side-effects, drug familiarity of the prescriber, and cost.
Whereas opioids are the cornerstone for ‘severe’ and
perioperative pain, NSAIDs are the cornerstone for ‘lesser’
pain states treated longer term. This is because of the
NSAID characteristics as anti-inflammatories, analgesics,
and antipyretics. Furthermore, the ease of administration
and side-effects of NSAIDs are less than for extended-use
opioids. The WHO has suggested an approach to pain
management (Figure 24.28), progressing from NSAIDs to
opioids.
As veterinary medicine becomes more sophisticated
in pain management, drug profiles from human medicine are being considered (and often implemented) for
veterinary application. Consequently, a number of drugs
administered in human medicine are being used in veterinary medicine based on an anthropomorphic approach
and empirical or hearsay support. However, considering
that veterinary clinical trials with many of these drugs
(e.g. tramadol, amantadine, and gabapentin) are presently nonexistent, the use of such drugs may have a role
in veterinary medicine provided (1) the drug’s mode of
action is understood, and (2) the presumption that there
is similar physiology between humans and the veterinary target species is correct.
Neuropathic pain can be thought of as the ‘progressed
pain state’, potentially resulting from any significant

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1054

Elements of therapy

Table 24.11 Commonly used drugs with doses and characteristics.
Dose

Species

Route

Duration

Comments

0.5–1.0 mg/kg

Canine

IM, SC

3–4 hours

Caution with IV
­administration: histamine
release

0.05–0.1 mg/kg

Feline

IM, SC

3–4 hours

0.2 mg/kg loading dose,
then 0.1–0.5 mg/kg/hour

Canine

IM then CRI

0.2 mg/kg loading dose,
then 0.05–0.1 mg/kg/hour

Feline

IM then CRI

0.1 mg/kg preservative
free

Canine/feline

Epidural

1–5 mg in 5–10 ml

Canine

Intra-articular

Meperidine

3–5 mg/kg

Canine/feline

IM, SC

1–2 hours

Methadone

0.1–0.5 mg/kg

Canine/feline

IM, SC

2–4 hours

NMDA antagonist activity

Oxymorphone

0.05–0.1 mg/kg

Canine

IM, IV, SC

3–4 hours

Minimal histamine release

0.03–0.05 mg/kg

Feline

IM, SC

3–4 hours

Hydromorphone

0.1–0.2 mg/kg

Canine

IM, IV, SC

2–4 hours

Minimal histamine release

Fentanyl

5 µg/kg initial dose, then
3–6 µg/kg/hour

Canine

IV then CRI

2–3 µg/kg initial dose,
then 2–3 µg/kg/hour

Feline

IV then CRI

25 µg/hour

Canine 3–10
kg body
weight

1–3 days

24 hours to reach peak
concentrations

50 µg/hour

Canine 10–20
kg body
weight

1–3 days

75 µg/hour

Canine 20–30
kg body
weight

1–3 days

100 µg/hour

Canine >30
kg body
weight

1–3 days

25–50 µg/hour

Feline

≤6 days

6 hours to reach peak
concentrations

0.1–0.2 mg/kg

Canine/feline

IM, IV, SC

Dog 1 hour;
cat 2–4
hours

Low oral bioavailability

0.2–0.4 mg/kg, then
0.1–0.2 mg/kg/hour

Canine/feline

IV then CRI

Opioids
Morphine

Fentanyl patch

Butorphanol
(10 mg/ml)

K22463_C024.indd 1054

12–24 hours

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

1055

Table 24.11 Commonly used drugs with doses and characteristics.
Dose

Species

Route

Duration

Comments

Pentazocine

1–3 mg/kg

Canine/feline

IM, IV, SC

2–4 hours

Nalbuphine

0.03–0.1 mg/kg

Canine/feline

IM, IV, SC

2–4 hours

Buprenorphine

5–20 µg/kg

Canine/feline

IM, IV, SC

4–10 hours

15–30 minute onset.
Excellent buccal mucosa
absorption in cats

Tramadol

2–10 mg/kg

Canine

PO

12–24 hours

Non-scheduled. Mu
­agonist activity. Serotonin
and norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor.
NMDA ­antagonist at
lower doses, GABA
­receptor inhibitor at high
concentrations

Codeine

1–2 mg/kg

Canine

PO

2–15 µg/kg

Canine

IM, IV

0.5–1.5 hours

5–20 µg/kg

Feline

IM, IV

0.5–1.5 hours

1 µg/kg, then
0.0015 mg/kg/hour

Canine/feline

IV then CRI

Sedation, bradycardia,
vomition. For dexmedetomidine use one-half the
dosing recommendations
made for medetomidine

1–5 µg/kg

Canine/feline

Epidural

2–5 µg/kg

Canine/feline

Intra-articular

0.1–0.5 µg/kg

Canine/feline

IM, IV

0.1 mg/kg IV;
0.3–0.5 mg/kg IM

Canine/feline

IV, IM

0.05–0.2 mg/kg

Canine/feline

IV

Ketamine

0.5 mg/kg, then
0.1–0.5 mg/kg/hour

Canine/feline

IV then CRI

Amantadine

3–5 mg/kg

Canine/feline

PO

Dextromethorphan

0.5–2 mg/kg

Canine

PO, SC, IV

Methadone

0.1–0.5 mg/kg

Canine/feline

IM, SC

Alpha-2 agonists
Medetomidine
(1.0 mg/ml)

Xylazine
(antagonist),
yohimbine
(antagonist),
atipamezol

0.5–1.0 hours

2–4 times the
­ edetomidine dose
m

NMDA antagonists

24 hours

Neuropathic pain
D-isomer of codeine; weak
NMDA antagonist

2–4 hours

Opioid derivative
(Continued)

K22463_C024.indd 1055

23/04/16 1:25 pm

1056

Elements of therapy

Table 24.11 Commonly used drugs with doses and characteristics. (Continued)
Dose

Species

Route

Duration

1.0 mg/kg

Canine

PO

12–24 hours

0.5–1.0 mg/kg

Feline

PO

12–24 hours

5–10 mg/kg

Canine/feline

PO

12–24 hours

0.025–0.05 mg/kg

Canine

IM, IV, SC

8–12 hours

0.05–0.2 mg/kg

Feline

IM, SC

8–12 hours

0.1–0.2 mg/kg

Canine/feline

IV

2–4 hours

0.25-1.0 mg/kg

Canine/feline

PO

12–24 hours

≤6.0 mg/kg

Canine

Perineural

1–2 hours

≤3.0 mg/kg

Feline

Perineural

1–2 hours

2–4 mg/kg, then
25–80 mcg/kg/minute

Canine

IV then CRI

0.25–0.75 mg/kg, then
10–40 mcg/kg/minute

Feline

Slow IV then
CRI

≤2.0 mg/kg

Canine

Perineural

2–6 hours

≤1.0 mg/kg

Feline

Perineural

2–6 hours

≤6.0 mg/kg

Canine

Perineural

2–2.5 hours

≤3.0 mg/kg

Feline

Perineural

2–2.5 hours

Comments

Tricyclic
antidepressant
Amitriptyline

Ca2++ channel
modulator
Gabapentin
Adjunct
Acepromazine

Diazepam

3 mg maximum total dose;
used to potentiate or
­prolong analgesic drugs

Used to potentiate or
­prolong analgesic drugs

Local anesthetics
Lidocaine (1–2%)

Bupivacaine
(0.25–0.5%)

Mepivacaine
(1–2%)

noxious insult. It is much easier to identify in humans
than in other animals. Although not evidence based,
a logical approach to managing the progressive pain
state is suggested (Figure 24.29). In this approach the
protocol of pain management is a multimodal scheme,
with drug classes added rather than substituted. The
doses are empirical, and one could debate the order of

K22463_C024.indd 1056

Onset 10–15 minutes.
Maximum dose: 12 mg/kg
(canine); 6 mg/kg (feline)

Onset 20–30 minutes.
Maximum dose: 2 mg/kg
(canine or feline)

implementation from bottom to top. The merit of this
approach is the addition of agents from different drug
classes in an attempt to block as many of the ‘pain pathways’ (transduction, transmission, modulation, and perception) as possible.
The real mandate of medical care is not the saving of
lives, but the dispensing of comfort. We cannot expect to

23/04/16 1:25 pm

Pain management

1057

24.28

24.29

Opioids

(μ and κ)

Ad
jun
rop
t
ria

(NMDA)
Amantadine
(3–5 mg/kg q24h)
Gabapentin
(Ca2++ channel)
(2–20 mg/kg q12h)
Tramadol
(2–10 mg/kg q8h)

(Opioid
serotonergic)

NSAID

(Cyclo-oxygenase)

e

Mild to moderate pain:
nonopioid & weak opioid

Ne
uro
pa

pp

sa

sa

thi
cp

rug

ain

ct d

Moderate
to severe pain:
strong opioid &
nonopioid

Mild pain:
nonopioid (NSAID)

Weight control/exercise; chondroprotectant EPA-diet; physical rehab

Figure 24.28 An approach to pain management as suggested
by the World Health Organization.

Figure 24.29 A logical approach to managing the progressive
pain state.

extend life forever, but we can hope to extend lives free of
suffering. When treating pain, knowledge is still the best
weapon.

Lee VC, Rowlingson JC (1995) Pre-emptive analgesia: update on
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in anesthesia. Adv
Anesth V12:69–110.
Liu SK, Tilley LP, Tappe JP et al. (1986) Clinical and pathologic
findings in dogs with atherosclerosis: 21 cases (1970–1983).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 189(2):227–232.
Mannix K, Ahmedazai SH, Anderson H et al. (2000) Using
bisphosphonates to control the pain of bone metastases:
evidence-based guidelines for palliative care. Palliative Med
14:455–461.
Robertson SA, Lascelles BDX, Taylor PM et al. (2005) PK-PD
­modeling of buprenorphine in cats: intravenous and
oral transmucosal administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
28:453–460.
Shafford HL, Lascelles BDX, Hellyer PW (2001) Preemptive
­analgesia: managing pain before it begins. Vet Med
6:478–491.
Singh G, Fort JG (2006) Celecoxib versus naproxen and
diclofenac in osteoarthritis patients: SUCCESS-I Study. Am J
Med 119:255–288.
Souter AJ, Fredman B, White PF (1994) Controversies in the
perioperative use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Anesth Analg 79:1178–1190.
Wooten JG, Blikslager AT, Ryan KA et al. (2008) Cyclooxygenase
expression and prostanoid production in pyloric and
­duodenal mucosae in dogs after administration of
­nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. Am J Vet Res
69:457–464.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
Bianchi M, Broggini M, Balzarini P et al. (2003) Effects of
­tramadol on synovial fluid concentrations of substance
P and interleukin-6 in patients with knee ­osteoarthritis:
comparison with paracetamol. Int Immunopharmacol
3:1901–1908.
Fox SM (2009) Chronic Pain in Small Animal Medicine. Manson
Publishing, London.
Fox SM (2014) Pain Management in Small Animal Medicine. CRC
Press, Boca Raton.
Fox SM, Mellor DJ, Firth EC et al. (1994) Changes in plasma
cortisol concentrations before, during and after analgesia,
anaesthesia and anaesthesia plus ovariohysterectomy in
bitches. Res Vet Sci 57:110–118.
Honore P, Luger NM, Sabino MA et al. (2000) Osteoprotegerin
blocks bone cancer-induced skeletal destruction, skeletal
pain and pain-related neurochemical reorganization of the
spinal cord. Nat Med 6(5):521–528.
Kukanich B, Papich MG (2004) Pharmacokinetics of tramadol
and the metabolite O-desmethyltramadol in dogs. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 27:239–246.
Lascelles BDX, Blikslager AT, Fox SM et al. (2005)
Gastrointestinal tract perforations in dogs treated with a
selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor: 29 cases (2002–2003).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 27(7):1112–1117.

K22463_C024.indd 1057

23/04/16 1:25 pm

This page intentionally left blank

1059

Chapter 25
Nutrition of the critically-ill dog and cat
Justin Shmalberg

INTRODUCTION
Nutrition is increasingly recognized as an essential
­component of veterinary evaluation and treatment. The
provision of adequate calories and nutrients in critically
ill patients has received significant attention in recent
years. Nevertheless, controversy and varying quality of
evidence persist. Non-interventional retrospective studies demonstrate that critically-ill patients are less likely
to be fed to meet estimated caloric requirements and are
also more likely to have extended hospital stays. However,
the retrospective nature of these studies limits the ability
to draw a clear link between caloric deficit and patient
outcome. Such studies do document a failure by clinicians
to provide specific nutritional orders, suggesting that
nutrition is often overlooked regardless of clinician opinion on the merits of nutritional support. One controlled
study of early enteral nutrition in puppies hospitalized
for parvovirus infection did document an earlier clinical
improvement in those patients fed through a nasoesophageal tube. Therefore, specific critical patients are likely
to benefit from voluntary and assisted enteral nutrition.

CURRENT EVIDENCE
Critical care veterinary nutrition has been poorly studied in hypothesis-driven research. Consequently, nutritional evidence from human nutritional research often
guides interventions in clinical practice. Acute illness
in both humans and other animals is characterized by a
reduction in appetite and increased catabolism of endogenous reserves of protein. These effects are mediated by
a complex milieu of cytokines including tumor necrosis
factor-alpha, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1B, hormones such as
cortisol, epinephrine, glucagon-like peptide 1, changes
in resting metabolic rate, and the immune response. The
decline in lean body mass secondary to protein catabolism has been associated with prolonged hospital stay and
rehabilitation in human patients. Provision of protein
and/or essential amino acids has decreased the magnitude of muscle loss in some studies. Such data have not

K22463_C025.indd 1059

been collected for veterinary patients, but are thought to
be similar. Fasting may have protective effects, however,
on some aspects of recovery. Starvation is associated with
increases in protein recycling through the ubiquitin–
proteasome pathway, which processes damaged or potentially toxic proteins. Other studies in human subjects
determined that delivery of the full calculated nutritional
requirement was associated with increased morbidity
compared with those patients receiving more conservative nutritional interventions. Therefore, the timing and
type of nutritional intervention in critical patients is still
the subject of much debate.
Human nutritional studies in acute or hospitalized patients are often characterized by small sample sizes and differing patient populations, making
­meta-analyses challenging. The paucity of data in the
veterinary l­iterature makes definitive conclusions even
more elusive. Experience with hospitalized human subjects suggests that nutritional best practices may vary
with different diseases; recommendations for patients
with acute kidney injury (AKI) or chronic kidney disease
(CKD) are quite different, for example. As such, veterinary patients likely also experience different conditionand individual-specific requirements for nutrients and
for calories. The level of sophistication of evidence-based
interventions in veterinary medicine is therefore poor.
Interestingly, dogs display increased adaptability to starvation compared with humans, and are evolutionarily
programed for significant post-prandial fasting. Cats,
conversely, have constitutive upregulation of gluconeogenesis and a lower gastric volume, suggesting adaptability to frequent feedings. Future studies are needed
to better refine clinical knowledge, and the guidelines
contained herein should be critically evaluated in such
a context.

CLINICAL EVALUATION
Nutritional intervention relies on a complete and thorough clinical examination. Specific attention must be
paid to body condition score (BCS), muscle condition,

23/04/16 1:27 pm

1060

Elements of therapy

visible markers of nutritional status such as dermis and
coat, and appropriate identification of co-morbidities.
A detailed diet history is equally critical. The initial diet
history may be complicated by triage and stabilization
of the patient as well as owners’ focus on other critical
aspects of their animal’s care. However, historical diet
information should be obtained at the earliest opportunity. This permits detection of chronic malnutrition due
to hyporexia, chronic gastrointestinal (GI) abnormalities,
or previous dietary deficiencies. The provision of nutrition should ideally be tailored to the individual based on
the clinician’s subsequent synthesis of owner input and
examination findings.

History
A diet history is a commonly overlooked aspect of
­nutritional assessment. Historical information can provide information about a patient’s caloric ­requirements,
feeding habits, recent caloric intake, and food preferences. The latter is especially important in cats, who may
be neophobic, especially during acute hospitalization.
An awareness of recent calorie consumption can determine the timing of nutritional intervention. For ­example,
a hospitalized cat with several weeks of marked hyporexia should receive nutritional support sooner to prevent hepatic lipidosis, compared with a cat with acute
anorexia. Some individual dogs may receive food in the
home environment at an amount close to the resting
fed energy requirement used for hospitalized patients.
Dogs of some breeds, such as Labrador Retrievers,
Newfoundlands, and Corgis, commonly consume less
than calculated with ­predictive equations. Such factors
are critical when individualizing care.
A thorough diet history may not be possible at a
patient’s initial presentation. However, technicians or the
supervising clinician should try to obtain this information following triage. The diet history should include:

●● The type of food commonly fed, including brand,
type, and flavor.

●● The type and quantity of treats and supplemental
foods.

●● Specifics regarding dietary supplements.
●● Feeding habits (free-choice, meal fed).
●● Food allergies, aversions, or preferences.
Clients may need to investigate packaging at home before
providing pertinent details given the diversity of foods
on the market and the distracted focus of many owners
during their pet’s illness. Such detailed information is necessary to determine the caloric content and nutrient profile of various foods. Dietary supplements are increasingly

K22463_C025.indd 1060

encountered, and the potential for t­ oxicity and interactions
between herbs and drugs has been reported. Knowledge of
feeding habits can provide useful information regarding
the likelihood of a patient eating on a particular schedule.
Some dogs, with small breeds appearing overrepresented,
are accustomed to being fed free-choice and may not be
accustomed to the scheduled feeding initiated during hospitalization. Food allergies and intolerance are frequently
reported by owners; regardless of the merits of these
claims, care should be taken to avoid significant dietary
changes in order to prevent acute GI signs. A diet history
form can be designed to incorporate these questions and
be tailored to a particular practice; such forms can also be
employed during therapeutic weight loss.

Body weight and condition
Body weight is frequently measured in clinical patients,
primarily for assessing fluid status. Acute changes are
most likely fluid related, but repeated measures in chronically treated patients can suggest inadequate nutritional
intake. Ideal body weight is also the basis for predictive caloric requirement equations. Patients with effusions, edema, and extensive neoplasia are more reliably
assessed by BCS and muscle condition score (MCS) than
by body weight.
Body condition scoring provides an assessment of
energy reserves, primarily adipose tissue. A 9-point
­system of scoring has been objectively validated, with
4–5/9 representing ideal body weight (Figure 25.1).
This is ­
characterized by a clearly visible waist, an
‘abdominal tuck’ when viewed from the side, and­
minimal fat c­overing over the ribs. Many sighthounds
display a normal body condition of 3/9. Some breed standards and purebred dog owners may regard 6/9 as ideal
for the breed, but unlike sighthounds, there is no physiologic advantage to this preference.
Ideal body weight is calculated for overweight dogs
(BCS 6–9/9) using simple conversions. Assessments of
patient adiposity demonstrate that each BCS over 5 represents 10–15% over a patient’s ideal body weight in dogs.
For example, a 40 kg dog with a BCS of 8/9 is 30–45% over
ideal weight; using the upper end of this range, the dog’s
measured body weight is 145% of ideal body weight and
therefore ideal body weight is equal to (40 kg)/(145%) or
about 28 kg.
The ideal weight of most cats can be estimated
by visual assessment. Most cats should be between
3 and 5 kg, so mathematical formulas are unnecessary.
Overweight cats are predisposed to a number of conditions encountered in critical care medicine, including
hepatic lipidosis, lower urinary tract obstruction, and
diabetes mellitus.

23/04/16 1:27 pm

Nutrition of the critically-ill dog and cat

Muscle condition
Protein catabolism and loss of lean body mass is poorly
assessed with body condition scoring. A separate score
has been developed to assess muscle, which is the
5
Point
1/5

Cat

1061

primary source of amino acids in catabolic animals.
Multiple methods of scoring are available, and some
may be referred to as a cachexia score. The author uses a
3-point scale where 3/3 indicates normal muscle mass,

Description
Dogs: Ribs, lumbar vertebrae, pelvic bones, and all
bony prominences evident from a distance. No
discernible body fat. Obvious loss of muscle mass.

Dog

9
Point

25.1

1/9

Cats: Ribs visible on short-haired cats; no palpable
fat; severe abdominal tuck; lumbar vertebrae and
wings of ilia obvious and easily palpable.

1.5/5

Dogs: Ribs, lumbar vertebrae and pelvic bones
easily visible. No palpable fat. Some evidence of other
bony prominence. Minimal loss of muscle mass.

2/9

Cats: Shared characteristics of BCS 1 and 3.

2/5

Dogs: Ribs easily palpated and may be visible with
no palpable fat. Tops of lumbar vertebrae visible.
Pelvic bones becoming prominent. Obvious waist.

3/9

Cats: Ribs easily palpable with minimal fat covering;
lumbar vertebrae obvious; obvious waist behind ribs;
minimal abdominal fat.

2.5/5

Dogs: Ribs easily palpable, with minimal fat covering.
Waist easily noted, viewed from above. Abdominal
tuck evident.

4/9

Cats: Shared characteristics of BCS 3 and 5.

3/5

Dogs: Ribs palpable without excess fat covering.
Waist observed behind ribs when viewed from
above. Abdomen tucked up when viewed.

5/9

Cats: Well proportioned; waist observed behind ribs;
ribs palpable with slight fat covering; abdominal fat
pad minimal.

(Continued)

K22463_C025.indd 1061

23/04/16 1:27 pm

1062

Elements of therapy

5
Point
3.5/5

9
Point

Description
Dogs: Ribs palpable with slight excess fat covering.
Waist is discernible viewed from above but is not
prominent. Abdominal tuck apparent.

6/9

Cats: Shared characteristics of BCS 5 and 7.

4/5

Dogs: Ribs palpable with difficulty; heavy fat cover.
Noticeable fat deposits over lumbar area and base
of tail. Waist absent or barely visible. Abdominal
tuck may be present.

7/9

Cats: Ribs not easily palpable with moderate fat
covering; waist poorly discernible; obvious rounding
of abdomen; moderate abdominal fat pad.

4.5/5

Dogs: Ribs not palpable under very heavy fat cover,
or palpable only with significant pressure. Heavy fat
deposits over lumbar area and base of tail. Waist
absent. No abdominal tuck. Obvious abdominal
distension may be present.

8/9

Cats: Shared characteristics of BCS 7 and 9.

5/5

Dogs: Massive fat deposits over thorax, spine, and
base of tail. Waist and abdominal tuck absent. Fat
deposits on neck and limbs. Obvious abdominal
distention.

9/9

Cats: Ribs not palpable under heavy fat cover; heavy
fat deposits over lumber area, face, and limbs;
distension of abdomen with no waist; extensive
abdominal fat pad.

Figure 25.1 Body condition score (BCS).

2/3 mild muscle wasting, 1/3 moderate, and 0/3 marked
(Figure 25.2). The high rates of weight loss (>2% per week)
seen in prolonged anorexia are characterized by loss of
lean body mass as well as adipose stores. Therefore, a
decline in both muscle condition and body condition is a
sign of malnutrition.

Laboratory markers
Laboratory values from significantly malnourished
animals are often within normal limits. Biochemical
­
profiles and complete blood counts are unreliable indicators of nutritional status. Severe hypoalbuminemia, for

K22463_C025.indd 1062

example, is rarely encountered with prolonged starvation as production is prioritized by the animal; patients
presenting with this condition are more likely to have
decreased production or increased loss from another
cause. Specialized diagnostic testing, such as amino acid
profiles and ­
vitamin levels, is available at some academic research laboratories. The extended turnaround
times and limited published information on many of
these tests in critical care settings limit their use to those
cases where clinical suspicion of nutrient deficiency is
high, such as in dilated cardiomyopathy in dogs fed lower
protein diets or in suspected thiamine deficiency in cats.

23/04/16 1:27 pm

Nutrition of the critically-ill dog and cat

25.2
Description

Figure

TIMING OF NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT
The decision-making rubric for when to intervene with
nutritional support is the most contested aspect of critical care nutrition. Current clinical guidelines in humans
promote early enteral feeding, and in the event of severe
or lengthy caloric deficits, parenteral nutrition (Figure
25.3). The trials that suggested a survival benefit for
early enteral nutrition were small and contained interventions in the control group, such as parenteral nutrition, which could have worsened survival. The only
comparable controlled study in veterinary medicine
enrolled puppies with parvovirus infection. All dogs in
that study survived, so the statistically significant outcome measure was a 1-day reduction in clinical signs in
dogs fed a liquid diet via a nasoesophageal tube. Dogs are
documented to survive longer with complete starvation
compared with people, suggesting an adaptive ability to
tolerate extended fasting. Dogs also display higher rates
of fatty oxidation at rest and may therefore be uniquely
suited to accommodating for increased lipolysis and
beta-­oxidation. Nutritional support is often provided earlier in the course of disease in cats due to concerns about
hepatic lipidosis. However, only 1 of 12 cats experimentally receiving 25% of their energy requirements developed hyperbilirubinemia after 1 month, and provision
of a high-protein diet at this reduced intake decreased
hepatic lipid concentration. Early interventional nutrition at low caloric intakes may be protective against complications during illness, but further work is required and
species-specific studies may not be translational to other
animals. A simplified algorithm for veterinary patients
is suggested in the absence of definitive ­
information
(Figure 25.4).

No muscle wasting,
normal muscle mass
skin
fat
muscle
bone
Mild muscle wasting

Moderate muscle
wasting

Marked muscle wasting

Figure 25.2 Muscle condition score.
Day 1: Enteral nutrition (EN)
(preferred)

72 hours: kcal target

Enteral intolerance

No CPN or PPN
for 1–2 weeks

25.3

Reasons to slow or delay intake:
fluid or blood resuscitation,
hemodynamic instability

Protein–energy malnutrition?
Negative N balance?

No

1063

EN tolerated

Yes
Parenteral
nutrition

Determine caloric target
Preferred: indirect calorimetry
Secondary: equations

50% caloric target delivered during week 1 (minimum)
100% caloric target during week 2

Figure 25.3 Human nutritional intervention rubric. (Adapted from American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition Guidelines.)
N, nitrogen; CPN, central parenteral nutrition; PPN, peripheral parenteral nutrition.

K22463_C025.indd 1063

23/04/16 1:27 pm

1064

Elements of therapy

Day 1: Enteral nutrition (EN)
(preferred)
Enteral

Target: 10-100% RER
Reasons to slow or delay intake:
hemodynamic instability,
persistent regurgitation, vomiting,
ileus, supportive tube intolerance

intolerance

> 5 days of anorexia?
Chronic decrease in BCS or MCS?

EN tolerated

Yes

No
Reassess daily
for up to 5 days

25.4

Consider
parenteral nutrition
or feeding tube

Estimate RER (kcal/day):
Dogs: 70 to 84 x (ideal body weight in kg)0.75
Cats: 150–200 kcal per cat

No
Voluntary intake
at day 5?

Yes

Quantify and modify intake as needed

Figure 25.4 Proposed veterinary nutrition decision tree for critically-ill patients. BCS, body condition score; MCS, muscle condition
score; RER, resting energy requirements.

NUTRITIONAL AND CALORIC
REQUIREMENTS
Dietary nutrient percentages or concentrations define a
food’s composition, but knowledge of the amount of food
fed is critical to determining the dose of nutrients to be
administered. Therefore, calculation of caloric needs and
an accurate assessment of intake are critical in nutritional support. The hospitalized animal is generally less
active than when at home, with the exception of some cats
who may be less active during daily routines. The resting
energy expenditure (REE) is commonly used as an assessment of fasting, resting land mammals in thermoneutral
environments, which characterizes most hospitalized
patients. The so-called Kleiber equation (70 × [ideal body
weight in kg]0.75) is used to calculate this figure. The
­logarithmic component explains why small animals consume more calories per unit of mass than large animals.
For dogs between 5 and 25 kilograms, a simplified linear
equation ([30 × ideal body weight in kg] + 70) kcal/day is
employed. Ideal body weight is calculated from current
body weight in obese patients to prevent overfeeding,
as adipose tissue is less metabolically active than lean
body mass.
Patients receiving nutritional support are not fasting,
and therefore resting fed metabolic rate is more appropriate than REE. The digestion and conversion of nutritional substrates requires energy, generally about 10–20%
more than in fasting animals. The dramatic differences

K22463_C025.indd 1064

in energy expenditure between animals largely negate
the benefits of using this higher amount, which requires
a more complex formula or a second multiplication step.
Clinicians historically also applied illness factors for specific conditions thought to be associated with increased
metabolic rate (e.g. burns, sepsis, neoplasia). However,
studies suggest that these factors are unnecessary and
overestimate true caloric needs.
Cats, unlike dogs, present with relatively homogeneous ideal body weights of between 3 and 5 kilograms.
Most resting cats, which includes both those hospitalized
and indoor pets, should consume 200–250 calories per
day. Equations are unnecessary in cats, and the author
typically uses an estimate of 150 kcal/day for a small cat
and 200 kcal/day for a larger cat. Most owners dramatically overfeed domestic cats, which could be detrimental
if continued during treatment.
The percentage of energy requirements met with
nutritional support is likely to affect morbidity and
possibly mortality. Human energy requirements can
be guided by indirect calorimetry, whereby a medical
device measures oxygen consumption to determine the
actual instantaneous metabolic rate of that individual.
Such measurements are technically difficult and expensive. Human studies relying on predictive equations,
similar to those used in veterinary medicine, produced
hyperalimentation in some patients, which may increase
overall morbidity. Conversely, in studies examining permissive underfeeding, where the intentional provision

23/04/16 1:27 pm

Nutrition of the critically-ill dog and cat

of caloric intake is less than the calculated or measured
requirements, the results generally show favorable or
better outcomes compared with those receiving full
caloric intake.
Parenteral nutrition in humans, when compared
with fasting for up to a week, has in some studies produced poorer outcomes. The complications of IV nutrition include hyperglycemia, secondary infections,
activation of the reticuloendothelial system, hyperlipidemia, and thrombophlebitis. Hyperglycemia is the most
commonly reported complication in the dog, but this
is likely related to provision of high concentrations of
dextrose. Dogs and cats appear to tolerate low dextrose,
high amino acid, and high-fat diets better than human
patients. It is therefore unclear if comparisons of enteral
and parenteral nutrition in humans accurately reflect
the clinical picture in small animals. Further research
in veterinary medicine is necessary to compare fasting,
permissive ­underfeeding, and feeding to meet calculated
requirements.

DIET EVALUATION AND COMPARISON
Commercial pet foods are difficult to evaluate and to
­compare using product packaging. Most veterinarians
are interested in nutrient comparisons, and generally
turn to the guaranteed analysis on the product label to
identify critical nutritional information. The label itself,
which is generally modeled after Association of American
Feed Control Officials suggested guidelines in the USA,
may be misleading. Firstly, the amounts listed are the
minimum or maximum ‘guaranteed’ to be present, and
the percentages are ‘as fed,’ which includes the dietary
moisture. Canned diets, containing approximately 80%
water, have lower listed nutrient percentages than dry
foods containing 10% moisture or less. Secondly, conversion to dry matter percentages overcomes the moisture
variable, but there are other nutrients that add weight
to the food but not calories, including fiber and ash.
Nutritionists and veterinarians therefore should only
compare foods on a caloric basis, commonly expressed
as the grams of a particular nutrient per 1,000 calories
(kcal), or 1 Mcal.
The caloric basis for commercial pet foods can be
calculated using the guaranteed analysis and caloric
­
­density located on the bag. Specific simplified formulas
are available (Figure 25.5). Some diets with low fat percentages on the label are not in fact fat restricted and
therefore inappropriate for the long-term management
of chronic active pancreatitis. Many weight loss diets
appear restricted in nutrients on the label due to the

K22463_C025.indd 1065

1065

inclusion of large amounts of fiber, but when fed at an
appropriate number of calories, are often higher in nutrients. The caloric basis in many product guides is now
readily available to veterinarians. Current nutrient profiles for diets encountered in many critical care centers
are provided (see Table 25.1).

NUTRIENT CONSIDERATIONS
Water
Water is an important essential nutrient, the requirement
for which is directly related to caloric requirements. Dogs
generally require 1 ml of water per kcal consumed, and
cats only about 0.6 ml of water per kcal consumed. Careful
attention should be paid to voluntary water intake, and
hydration should be frequently assessed to determine if
intervention is needed.

Protein
Many acute illnesses increase the rate of skeletal muscle proteolysis and contribute to a decrease in lean body
mass. Dietary protein can ameliorate some of this protein
loss and is generally well-tolerated, with the common
exceptions of severe renal disease or hepatic encephalopathy. In addition, if a patient’s food intake is reduced,
then a higher protein concentration in the diet is required
to meet daily minimums. A hyporexic patient with AKI
often should not consume a protein-restricted renal diet,
for example, because it may be insufficient in the amount
consumed to replace amino acid losses.
Specific amino acids have been discussed as an adjunct
to nutritional therapy in the critically ill patient.
Glutamine, a non-essential amino acid, is a nitrogen
donor produced by skeletal muscle to provide substrate
for amino acid production in critical tissues such as the GI
mucosa and liver. Decreased glutamine levels have been
documented in hospitalized human patients, but data
on supplemental doses of glutamine have been mixed.
Clinical studies in dogs are lacking, but a research study
of fasted dogs suggested some positive effects on GI glutathione status. Most foods contain glutamine, especially
animal protein sources, so the provision of dietary protein is likely more important than glutamine supplementation. Arginine, an essential amino acid in the dog and
cat, is a precursor to nitric oxide and an intermediate in
the urea cycle. Clinical utility in immunomodulation has
been suggested, and one therapeutic diet administered
to lymphoma patients includes elevated levels. However,
patient selection for supplementation in human subjects is
unclear, and no information is available for dogs and cats.
Nevertheless, it is prudent to meet minimal requirements,

23/04/16 1:27 pm

1066

Elements of therapy

TABLE 1. STEP BY STEP: ESTIMATING
NUTRIENT CONCENTRATION ON A
CALORIC BASIS
Step 1

• Add 1.5% to protein
percentage from pet food
label
• Add 1% to fat percentage
from pet food label

Step 2

Divide kcal/kg by 10,000

Step 3

Divide estimated protein
% and fat % by number
obtained in Step 2

25.5

TABLE 2. COMPARISON OF PET FOODS BY CALORIC BASIS
NRC RA*
(g/1000 kcal)

Low
(g/1000 kcal)

Moderate
(g/1000 kcal)

High
(g/1000 kcal)

Protein

25

< 60

60–90

> 90

Fat

13.8

< 30

30–50

> 50

Carbohydrate

n/a

< 50

50–90

> 90

Feline Diets

NRC RA*
(g/1000 kcal)

Low
(g/1000 kcal)

High
(g/1000 kcal)

Protein

50

< 80

Moderate
(g/1000 kcal)
80–120

Fat

22.5

< 40

40–60

> 60

Carbohydrate

n/a

< 35

35–70

> 70

Canine Diets

> 120

*National Research Council recommended allowance

2

TABLE 3. CONVERSION OF GUARANTEED ANALYSES + COMPARISON OF TWO COMMERCIAL DOG FOODS
Ingredient

PET FOOD 1 (DRY)

PET FOOD 2 (WET)

Crude protein (min)

25%

8%

Crude fat (min)

15%

5%

3606

1198

GUARANTEED ANALYSIS

CALORIE CONTENT
kcal/kg
CONVERSION
Protein

1. 25% + 1.5% = 26.5%
2. 3606 kcal/kg /10,000 = 0.3606
3. 26.5 / 0.3606 = 74 g/1000 kcal

1. 8% + 1.5% = 9.5%
2. 1198 kcal/kg/ 10,000 = 0.1198
3. 9.5 / 0.1198 = 79 g/1000 kcal

Fat

1. 15% + 1% = 16%
2. 3606 kcal/kg / 10,000 = 0.3606
3. 16 / 0.3606 = 44 g/1000 kcal

1. 5% + 1% = 6%
2. 1198 kcal/kg / 10,000 = 0.1198
3. 6 / 0.1198 = 50 g/1000 kcal

FINAL RESULT

Moderate protein / moderate fat

Moderate protein / high fat

References
1. Hill RC, Choate CJ, Soott KC et al. (2009) Comparison of the guaranteed analysis with the measured nutrient compostion of
commercial pet foods. JAVMA 234(3):347-351.
2. National Research Council Ad Hoc Committee on Dog and Cat Nutrition (2006) Nutrient Requirements of Dogs and Cats. National
Academies Press, Washington DC

Figure 25.5 Caloric basis calculations and comparisons. (Reprinted from Shmalberg J (2013) Beyond the guaranteed analysis:
comparing pet foods. Today’s Veterinary Practice 3(1):43, with permission.)

Table 25.1 A selection of commercial liquid diets administered to dogs in the USA.
Nutrient density

Abbot Ensure Plus

Abbot Clinicare

Abbot Jevity 1.5

Nestle Vivonex Plus

Protein (g/Mcal)

37

82

43

45

Fat (g/Mcal)

31

51

33

7

Note: Consult product guides for current specifications.

as with all amino acids. The recommended allowance for
protein is 25 grams and 50 grams per Mcal, respectively,
for dogs and cats. Hospitalized animals may consume less
than average pets, and therefore a provisional minimal
concentration of 50 grams of protein in dogs and 75 grams
of protein per Mcal in cats is recommended.

K22463_C025.indd 1066

Fats
Fats and protein are essential macronutrients; there is no
requirement for dietary carbohydrate. Glucogenic amino
acids can form glucose, but fatty acids cannot and must
be processed through beta-oxidation. Many fasting animals have higher rates of beta-oxidation than when fed,

23/04/16 1:27 pm

Nutrition of the critically-ill dog and cat

and small animals, especially the dog, may be distinctly
adapted to high-fat diets during starvation. Fats are also
more than twice as energy dense as protein and carbohydrate. The recommendations for dietary fats for maintenance are 13.8 and 22.5 grams per Mcal in dogs and cats,
respectively. As with protein, dietary concentrations
should be increased for reduced intake; values of 30 grams
and 40 grams, respectively, are advised. The type of fat
may also modulate response to disease. Polyunsaturated
fatty acids of the omega 3 and 6 fatty acid series are converted to inflammatory mediators in the prostaglandin
and leukotriene classes as well as thromboxanes. In general, omega 3 fatty acids, such as eicosapentaenoic acid
(EPA) and docosahexaenoic (DPA) found in marine sources
such as fish, produce less potent inflammatory mediators,
whereas omega 6 fatty acids such as linoleic acid produce
more potent mediators. A therapeutic dose of 1–3 mg of
EPA+DHA per calorie has been suggested as an adjunct
measure in the treatment of renal disease in order to
increase glomerular filtration rate, osteoarthritis due to
a reduction in intra-articular cytokines, and in neoplasia likely due to chemosensitization. European markets
license a parenteral lipid solution with elevated omega 3
fatty acids, while the American forms are primarily omega
6 fatty acids. The influence of these various lipid types
when administered parenterally in clinical veterinary
patients is not yet known.

Vitamins
Fat-soluble and water-soluble vitamins are commonly
added to commercial pet foods. Water-soluble vitamins
are of greatest concern in acute disease given the limited
storage pools and the effect of diuresis on vitamin loss.
B vitamins are the most common conditional deficiencies
and broadly function as cofactors to cellular metabolism.
Vitamin B12 deficiency requires chronic deficiency. The
lack of intrinsic factor production by the pancreas in cats
(as opposed to the pancreas and stomach in dog) with
chronic pancreatitis, or with impaired absorption due to
severe ileal disease in either species, could warrant prophylactic supplementation of B12. Injectable B complex
can be used to provide other B vitamins. Thiamine deficiency in cats causes anorexia, postural changes including ventroflexion, short seizures, and death, if untreated.
Clinical supplementation is warranted if these symptoms
are encountered, especially in cats historically fed canned
or unprocessed fish-based diets. In most clinical situations,
supplementation of vitamins A, D, E, and K is not advised.

Minerals
Many minerals are stored in sufficient quantity by
tissues so that acute supplementation is not needed

K22463_C025.indd 1067

1067

except with obvious deficiencies. Adult dogs and cats,
for ­example, have accessible calcium stores in bones.
Conditions that cause acute electrolyte shifts, however,
may prompt supplementation. Re-feeding syndrome has
been reported in cats and humans; it has been theorized
to occur in dogs but is poorly documented. The mechanism of re-feeding syndrome in severely emaciated
patients is thought to be due to a rapid infusion of carbohydrate into the duodenum, which stimulates a large
release of insulin, triggering intracellular electrolyte
shifts and resulting in severe hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, and hypomagnesemia. Fatal sequelae are possible. Therefore, diets given to emaciated animals should
be replete in minerals and ideally high in protein and fat
while low in carbohydrate; kitten and puppy foods generally provide suitable diets. Supplementation of other
minerals, such as zinc for effects on immune function
and selenium as a component of the intracellular antioxidant glutathione, has been recommended but poorly
supported.

ROUTES OF ADMINISTRATION
Voluntary intake
Voluntary food intake by hospitalized or acutely ill
patients is ideal given the low cost and the ability of the
animal to control the rate of feeding. Interventional nutrition is generally associated with a greater potential for
iatrogenic harm than voluntary intake, except in those
patients that have refractory vomiting or regurgitation
despite normal appetite. Ideally, the animal’s previous
diet should be offered during hospitalization, especially
for cats. Only if necessary should a single new and sacrificial diet be offered. Therapeutic diets intended for longterm feeding should not be offered during hospitalization
or acute illness so as to avoid the development of food
aversion. Similarly, offered foods should not be left in a
cage with an animal unless that animal has a ­history of
free-choice feeding and clinical suspicion is high that they
will voluntarily consume food. The constant smell of a particular diet within the cage during a period of illness has
been hypothesized to also trigger aversion. Ideally, voluntary intake should be precisely quantified to determine
the percent of caloric requirement being met. Weighing of
the food may be necessary for smaller animals.

Assisted enteral feeding
The decision to provide assistive support is guided by
the patient’s diet history, clinical assessment, and interventional logarithms (see Figure 25.4). Selection of the
appropriate assistive strategy is critical for ensuring the
best patient outcome.

23/04/16 1:27 pm

1068

Elements of therapy

Nasoenteral feeding tubes (Figures 25.6a–g)
Nasoenteral feeding tubes are generally employed for
short-term inpatient feeding. These tubes can be placed
without anesthesia or special equipment. The measurement of the tube before placement varies based on
the intended location of the distal aspect of the tube.
Nasoesophageal tubes should be measured from the tip
of the nose to ribs 7 to 9. Nasogastric tubes are measured
from the tip of the nose to the last rib. Nasojejunal tubes
are reported, but require a weighted tube and fluoroscopy for accurate placement. Nasoenteral tubes are usually of 3–8 French size, and are placed ventromedially
in the nasal cavity following intranasal administration
of a local anesthetic gel or topical ophthalmic solution.
Entry into the ventral meatus permits passage of the tube
through the nasal cavity into the esophagus. Animals
should ideally be monitored for swallowing as the tube
is passed. The distance from the nose to the medial canthus can be marked on the tube to guide when a swallow
should be observed. The tube is passed to the measured
length determined above. Tubes are generally affixed
to one of the nares with suture (a 22-guage needle can
be inserted first with suture passed through the sharp
end of the needle and then the needle removed leaving
the suture in tissue). Adhesive ‘super’ or tissue glue may
also be used, but removal of the tube can be more difficult and is presumably more painful for the patient. The
tube is affixed in one or two additional sites in order to
place it away from the eyes and for additional security.
Placement is confirmed with a two-view thoracic radiograph. Negative pressure should be present if the tube
is placed in the esophagus, and administration of sterile
saline should not elicit a cough. Nasogastric tubes have
been theorized to cause irritation of the lower esophageal sphincter and increased regurgitation or vomiting,
but there have been no documented differences in complication rates. Nasogastric tubes facilitate assessment of
residual gastric volumes, but large residual volumes are
not associated with increased GI signs and therefore routine monitoring and removal cannot be recommended.
Complications of nasoenteral tubes include rhinitis, transient epistaxis, patient intolerance, and tracheal placement or feeding. Only liquid diets can be administered,
either as a continuous infusion or in bolus feedings. Bolus
feedings using nasojejunal tubes have been successful in
clinical studies.

Esophagostomy tube (Figures 25.7a–m)
Esophagostomy tubes are a convenient means of shortor long-term nutritional support that are well-tolerated
and free of significant side-effects, with the exception of

K22463_C025.indd 1068

possible abscess formation around the tube site. The tube
is most easily placed in the left mid-cervical region with
the patient anesthetized and in right lateral recumbency.
A red rubber catheter or a commercially available feeding
tube with a size greater than or equal to 5 French is measured from rib 7 to 9 to the anticipated exit point, and that
measure is marked on the tube. For large dogs requiring
significant volumes of food, stallion urinary catheters
can be used to provide a greater diameter tube. Curved
hemostats or Carmalt forceps are placed in the mouth following aseptic preparation of the lateral neck. The instrument tip is placed in the proximal esophagus, and lateral
pressure is applied to ‘tent’ the skin over the esophagus
using the curved aspect of the forcep. An incision through
all the tissue overlying the instrument tip is made until
the instrument tip is exteriorized. The instrument handle
is then opened and the tip of the catheter clamped firmly
over the distal end of the tube. The tube is withdrawn
aborally and the tip redirected orally into the esophagus
as the tube is slowly withdrawn at the level of the skin
until it ‘turns’ and advances down the esophagus until
the previous mark is reached. Two-view thoracic radiographs should be obtained in order to confirm placement.
The tube can be used following anesthetic recovery, and
both canned and liquid diets can be administered.

Gastrostomy tube
Gastrostomy tubes are generally reserved for planned
long-term nutritional support when esophageal bypass
is clinically necessary due to megaesophagus, esophageal stricture, cervical disease, or for large volume feedings. ‘Low-profile’ gastrostomy tubes may also be better
tolerated than chronic esophagostomy tubes in some
patients that require months to years of assisted feedings. Gastrostomy devices have a larger lumenal diameter (18–24 French) than esophagostomy tubes, allowing
for a larger volume of fluid or food to be more easily
administered. Tubes can be placed percutaneously, with
or without endoscopic support, or surgically. The left
side of the patient is aseptically prepared 1–2 cm caudal
to the last rib and about one-third of the distance from
­epaxial ­muscles to ventral midline. Endoscopic insufflation of air permits endoscopic visualization of the stomach and allows for closer contact between the stomach
and the abdominal wall. The endoscope permits tactile
and visual (due to the light source) assessment of the
position of the stomach to facilitate needle penetration
(18 gauge, 1.5 inch) into the gastric lumen. A sterile flexible stylet or suture is then passed through the needle,
grasped with endoscopic forceps in the stomach, and
removed through the patient’s oral cavity. A gastrostomy

23/04/16 1:27 pm

Nutrition of the critically-ill dog and cat

1069

25.6

a

d

g

K22463_C025.indd 1069

c

b

e

f

Figures 25.6a–g Nasoesophageal tube placement. (a) The nasoenteral tube is
positioned for measurement. Rib 13 is used as a landmark for nasogastric tubes
and ribs 7–9 for nasoesophageal tubes. (b) The desired length is marked with
permanent ink. The distance from the naris to the medial canthus can also be
marked to provide visual feedback as to when to monitor for a swallow response.
(c) The tube is placed ventromedially to facilitate entry into the esophagus.
Topical local anesthetic is recommended. (d, e) The tube is passed to the previous
mark, and the tube affixed with a Chinese finger trap suture pattern, a skin
staple, or glued to the fur near the lateral aspect of the naris. (f) One or two
additional affixing sutures are placed to position the tube between the eyes so
that the feeding end of the tube is caudal to the head. (g) An Elizabethan collar
is placed to prevent the patient from dislodging the tube. Radiographs should
confirm appropriate placement following placement. The aspiration of negative
pressure and a lack of a cough with sterile saline administration can provide
additional confirmation, but may be inaccurate as the sole method of assessing
placement.

23/04/16 1:27 pm

1070

Elements of therapy

tube is then attached to the suture and the suture pulled
orally until the tube exits the abdominal wall. A balloon
or other device at the end of the tube prevents it from
pulling through the abdominal wall, but the position
of the tube should be marked to allow easy assessment
of migrating tubes. A retainer flange is used to provide
apposition of the ­gastric mucosa and the abdominal wall.
Alternatively, the blind technique usually involves a
special curved device, which is sized for the patient and
passed orally into the stomach to provide visual assessment for needle penetration. Appropriate placement of
blindly inserted tubes can be confirmed with liquid contrast and ­radiographs. Surgical techniques, described in
greater detail in surgical texts, have the advantage of
direct visualization of the tissues along with the ability
to place intra-abdominal a
­ ppositional sutures to prevent
leakage of gastric contents due to separation of the peritoneal wall and gastric surface.

Gastrostomy tubes are generally well-tolerated by
small animals. However, Elizabethan collars must be
employed in the first 2 weeks following placement and
animals should always be carefully monitored for ­licking
or attempts at tube removal. Prevention of bacterial contamination in the tissues around the skin is critically
important, as abscessation or chronic dermatitis can force
premature removal of the tube. Both esophagostomy and
gastrostomy tubes should be replaced as quickly as possible if inadvertently removed, as natural closure will rapidly occur.

Jejunostomy tube
Jejunostomy tubes are reserved for patients that require
gastric or duodenal bypass feeding. Such circumstances
include severe pancreatitis, persistent vomiting or regurgitation, gastric or duodenal neoplasia, gastric hypomotility, or gastric outflow obstruction. Surgical placement
25.7

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h

i

K22463_C025.indd 1070

23/04/16 1:27 pm

Nutrition of the critically-ill dog and cat

j

k

l

m

1071

Figures 25.7a–m Esophagostomy tube placement. (a) The left lateral neck is aseptically prepared. (b) The esophagostomy tube is
measured from the expected point of insertion to rib 7–9, and that distance marked on the tube with permanent ink. (c) A curved
instrument is passed orally into the esophagus and lateral pressure is applied until the instrument tip is palpated. (d) A stab incision
is made over the tip of the instrument. (e) The curved instrument tip is moved laterally to exit the incision. (f) The distal end of the
tube is grasped with the instrument. (g) The tube is pulled aborally with gentle traction. (h) The end of the tube is passed orally back
into the esophagus while slowly pulling laterally on the syringe end of the tube in order to facilitate movement of the tube into the
distal esophagus. (i) The tube is inserted to the level of the previous mark. (j) Chinese finger trap sutures are used to secure the tube
to the dermis. (k) Antibiotic ointment and/or gauze is applied over the esophagostomy site. The catheter end of the tube is capped.
(l) A nonocclusive bandage is applied to protect the area and to secure the tube. (m) A thoracic radiograph confirms appropriate
placement. (The arrow indicates the tip of the esophagostomy tube in front of the lower esophageal sphincter.)

with or without laparoscopy is generally required. Tubes
cannot be removed for 7–14 days following insertion as
creation of a stoma is required to prevent septic peritonitis, the most catastrophic of jejunostomy tube complications. Jejunostomy tubes may also be placed through
a gastrostomy tube, but endoscopic or intraoperative
guidance of the tube into the intestinal lumen is usually
required. In both cases, tube diameter limits feeding to
liquid enteral diets, and such diets are most commonly
administered as a continuous infusion. However, three
bolus feedings per day were not associated with increased
adverse effects in one study. Dogs and cats also clinically
appear to tolerate liquid diets of varying composition.

Tube management
Tube feedings can be complicated by obstructions within
the tube caused by saponification of fat, improperly
mixed diets, pH changes, incompatible medications, and

K22463_C025.indd 1071

similar substances. Tubes are commonly flushed with
warm water before and after each use, with an amount
consistent with the volume of the tube. Carbonated beverages and pancreatic enzyme solutions may also prove
helpful if obstructions do not respond to water alone.
Water is first administered following placement of
an assistive feeding tube. Nasoenteral and esophagostomy tubes may be used shortly following recovery from
any sedation or anesthesia. Other tubes that critically rely
on stoma formation, such as gastrostomy or jejunostomy
tubes, should be tested with water 12 hours after placement, and food can be administered about 24 hours after
insertion. Esophagostomy and jejunostomy tubes should
be wrapped when not being used and cleaned daily with
disinfectant solution.
Dietary options for feeding tubes are dictated by the
size of the feeding tube and the required caloric density.
Clinical veterinary and human liquid diets with caloric

23/04/16 1:27 pm

1072

Elements of therapy

densities of 1–1.5 kcal/ml are used for small diameter tubes such as nasoenteral and jejunostomy tubes
(Table 25.1). Human enteral diets should not be used in
cats, given the more stringent nutritional requirements of
this species, including an obligatory need for taurine and
arachidonic acid, and higher protein intakes compared
with dogs and humans. Canned diets can be employed in
most other assistive feeding devices. Any canned diet is
theoretically an option, but high-fiber diets have a very
low caloric density when mixed with sufficient water.
High-calorie, low-fiber, moderate to high protein and fat
diets facilitate the highest caloric densities (~1 kcal/ml)
(Table 25.2). Many ‘recovery’ diets are commercially manufactured to permit ease of administration through a
feeding tube.
Animals with feeding tubes may require frequent
feedings. No significant differences in continuous infusions as opposed to bolus feedings have been identified.
Aspiration and measurement of gastric residual volumes
is not beneficial in most cases. Gastric volume is the limiting factor in determining the number of feedings. Clinical
experience suggests that cats tolerate about 60 ml/­feeding
when administered over 10–15 minutes and therefore
require about four feedings per day. Dogs display much
greater gastric expansion with sufficient time. A figure of
50 ml/kg is commonly employed as an estimate of tolerated volume, but dogs are known to consume about 10%
of body weight in a single meal. Many dogs can be fed on
routine twice daily schedules with feeding tubes. Owners
should be instructed that less frequent feedings may be
possible, but will require additional time at each feeding.

may be appropriate for animals with prolonged ileus,
those receiving ventilator support, and those who display diffuse refractory GI symptoms. Parenteral nutrition
requires specialized techniques and solutions that may
not be available at all practices. The cost to feed patients
with this method can be substantially higher than with
enteral feeding.
IV nutrition can be administered through a central
line (central parenteral nutrition) or through a dedicated
peripheral catheter (peripheral parenteral nutrition).
The terms total and partial parenteral nutrition are no
longer used, as most veterinary parenteral nutrient mixtures do not meet the total nutrient requirements for
patients. Frequent complications of parenteral nutrition
include hyperglycemia and thrombophlebitis. Lowering
the dextrose content of the solution can reduce the risk
of the former and the latter is reduced by placement of
a central line. Peripheral parenteral nutrition solutions
should have an osmolality no greater than 650 mOsm/l.
Infection, possibly leading to sepsis, is theoretically possible, as some components of parenteral nutrition, such as IV
lipid, could serve as a bacterial media. However, the high
osmolality of parenteral nutrition solutions and careful
technique usually prevent contamination of the fluid
itself. Most parenteral nutrition-related infections occur
due to migration of bacteria around the catheter site, so
aseptic catheter technique is critically important. Only a
dedicated catheter or a dedicated port on a multi-lumen
catheter should be used. Injections should not be given
through the same port as parenteral nutrition.
Parenteral mixtures generally contain carbohydrate,
fat, and protein in the forms of dextrose, lipid emulsion, and amino acids (Table 25.3). Carbohydrate is not
required in the formulation, and both cats and dogs have
been managed with mixtures of only lipid emulsion
and amino acids. The concentration of dextrose appears
related to the incidence of hyperglycemia. IV lipid emulsions have been reported to impair reticuloendothelial

Parenteral nutrition
IV administration of nutrients is reserved for those cases
with documented or anticipated periods of prolonged
hyporexia or anorexia. However, patients with low BCSs
or MCSs may benefit from earlier intervention with
­parenteral nutrition. This method of nutritional support

Table 25.2 Commercial diets marketed for tube feeding critical patients in the USA.
Protein
(g/1,000 kcal)

Fat
(g/1,000 kcal)

Royal Canin Recovery

107

67

7

4.7

Science Diet A/D

92

63

3

32

Iams Maximum Calorie

72

64

5

21.5

Purina CN

79

74

1.5

15

Diet

Fiber
(g/1,000 kcal)

Carbohydrate
(g/1,000 kcal)

Note: Consult product guides for current specifications.

K22463_C025.indd 1072

23/04/16 1:27 pm

Nutrition of the critically-ill dog and cat

Table 25.3 Common components of parenteral nutrition.
Component

kcal/ml

mOsm/l

50% dextrose

1.7

2525

5% dextrose

0.17

253

20% lipid

2.0

260

8.5% amino acids without
electrolytes

~0.57

~700

8.5% amino acids with electrolytes

~0.57

1073

Table 25.4 A general parenteral nutrition solution for
peripheral administration.
Component

Volume (ml)

8.5% amino acids without electrolytes

500

20% lipid

250

5% dextrose

250

50% dextrose

25

~920

Hypertonic (7.2%) saline

40

Note: Peripheral solutions should be limited to less than
650 mOsm/l. The addition of electrolytes may increase
osmolality. Hypertonic saline provides 1.2 mEq of sodium and
chloride per ml and contains 2.4 mOsm/ml.

Heparin (1,000 units/ml)

1

system function in other species, which could have implications for their use in septic patients. Such solutions
could also worsen hyperlipidemia and have been hypothesized to worsen pancreatitis. However, the effect of IV
lipid on canine and feline pancreatitis is rarely reported,
and both species have been managed for this condition
with high-fat solutions. Peripheral parenteral nutrition
solutions commonly contain increased lipid compared
with centrally administered solutions, as lipid possesses
a lower osmolality compared with other constituents
(Tables 25.4 and 25.5). The higher basal rate of fatty acid
oxidation has prompted some authors to advocate the use
of lipid concentrations higher than those used in human
nutrition.
Multiple amino acid solutions are available, each with
a different blend of essential and nonessential amino
acids. Products are produced with or without electrolytes;
electrolyte-containing products generally require supplemental potassium and phosphorus, especially in animals that have experienced prolonged anorexia or tissue
catabolism. Insulin release causes both an intracellular
shift of potassium and an increased cellular phosphate
utilization related to the increased production of energy
stores, such as adenosine triphosphate or creatine phosphate. Phosphorus is typically added to achieve a concentration of 5–10 mmol/l. Electrolyte-free amino acid
solutions can be modified to include sodium and chloride
at rates consistent with maintenance or replacement fluids as required through the addition of hypertonic (7.2%)
saline.
Provision of water-soluble vitamins supports normal
energy metabolism by providing essential cofactors in
metabolic reactions. Some IV B complex solutions are
low in vitamin B12, so this should be administered SC

K22463_C025.indd 1073

Note: The calorie distribution of nutrients is 23% protein
(56 g/Mcal), 12% carbohydrate (30 g/Mcal), and 66% as lipid
(73 g/Mcal). The caloric density is 0.71 kcal/ml, and the calculated osmolality is 600 mOsm/l. Electrolyte ­composition is
61 mEq/l sodium, 46 mEq/l chloride, and 4 mEq/l phosphorus.
Additional electrolytes, minerals, and vitamins should be added
as the patient’s status dictates.
Table 25.5 A general parenteral nutrition solution for central
administration.
Component

Volume (ml)

8.5% amino acids without electrolytes

1,000

20% lipid

250

5% dextrose

500

Hypertonic (7.2%) saline

60

Heparin (1,000 units/ml)

1.8

Note: The calorie distribution of nutrients is 20% protein
(50 g/Mcal), 50% carbohydrate (125 g/Mcal), and 30% as
lipid (33 g/Mcal). The caloric density is 0.93 kcal/ml, and the
­calculated osmolality is 1,200 mOsm/l. Electrolyte composition
is 58 mEq/l sodium, 41 mEq/l chloride, and 2 mEq/l p
­ hosphorus.
Additional electrolytes, minerals, and vitamins should be added
as the patient’s status dictates.

if deficiency is predicted. Fat-soluble vitamins may be
added and are included in some multivitamin combinations designed for parenteral nutrition, but substantial
reserves are likely present in many patients. Trace elements for parenteral administration are available but
controversial.
The amount of protein, in the form of amino acids, to
administer is controversial. Protein requirements may be
expressed as a percentage of calories in some resources
or as an amount in grams to be fed per day. Protein may
also be given on top of the calculated caloric requirement

23/04/16 1:27 pm

1074

Elements of therapy

(200 kcal for most cats, 70 × [ideal body weight in kg]0.75
kcal for dogs) by some clinicians. The theory is that protein, when given above the calorie needs of an animal,
will be more likely used for anabolic reactions rather
than for ketogenesis or gluconeogenesis. The provision
of dietary protein only partially reverses catabolism in
many disease states characterized by high rates of nitrogen turnover and suspected protein loss. Provision of
20% of calories as protein (50 g/1,000 kcal) is adequate
for most patients, although encephalopathy may warrant
values as low as 40 g/1,000 kcal, and patients with other
conditions with high protein requirements can be given
solutions up to 28% of calories (70 g/1,000 kcal). Patients
fed less than their expected caloric requirements need a
solution with greater amino acid or fat concentrations to
maintain a consistent ‘dose’. Administration of low concentration amino acid solutions (3%) is unlikely to prevent muscle catabolism, especially in the absence of other
macronutrients, as most of the amino acids would be converted to energy. Therefore, protein without adequate
caloric intake is unlikely beneficial.
Parenteral nutrition requires special monitoring
and careful administration. Parenteral nutrition solutions should be refrigerated and kept for no longer than
7–10 days after mixing. Vitamins, if administered, should
be added just before hanging a bag to prevent degradation during storage. Careful aseptic techniques should
be employed when connecting parenteral nutrition,
and a new fluid line should be used with each new bag.
Sterile gloves are used when spiking each bag and when
connecting a new line to the patient’s catheter. Injection
ports can be disinfected and covered with sterile gauze,
as can all connections between the bag and patient. Some
vitamins degrade with ultraviolet light, and when exposure is likely, the bag and line should be covered with
special amber sleeves, bandage material, or aluminum
foil. The patient should be disconnected from parenteral
nutrition only once daily. The bags can be wrapped and
taken outside with the patient if necessary. Parenteral
solutions may benefit from the inclusion of 1 unit of heparin per ml of mixture to prevent local thrombosis formation and prevent the need for periodic flushing with
heparinized saline. Recommended monitoring includes
electrolytes twice daily along with a hematocrit/total protein and a visual check of the serum for hyperlipidemia.
Most patients can receive parenteral nutrition at one-half
of the calculated energy requirements during hospitalization over the first 6–12 hours, with an increase to the
full calculated rate thereafter, assuming that the patient
tolerates the volume and is unlikely to suffer severe electrolyte shifts secondary to re-feeding.

K22463_C025.indd 1074

Nutritional reassessment
Nutritional reassessment is difficult in critically-ill
patients, as many commonly measured laboratory
parameters are unreliable indicators of malnutrition.
Electrolytes should be closely monitored during any
nutritional intervention as feeding can create and correct
potential abnormalities. Body weight is affected by fluid
status, and both body condition and muscle condition
scoring systems are unlikely to change during a hospitalization period of 1 week or less. Frequent monitoring
of compliance to nutrition orders is preferred, as patient
procedures, anesthetic events, failure to follow treatment
sheets, and other factors may influence daily caloric
intake. Tolerance to feeding plans should also be assessed
because persistent vomiting, regurgitation, or diarrhea
may warrant alterations to the nutrition orders.

Disease-specific considerations
A number of conditions encountered in critically-ill
patients may benefit from specific nutritional ­strategies.
Each patient should be evaluated as an individual, but
general recommendations exist for a variety of conditions.

Pancreatitis
Dietary triggers for acute and chronic active pancreatitis are well described, with ingestion of foods high in fat
being the most common. Hyperstimulation of cholecystokinin has been hypothesized as a possible mechanism
in combination with other patient factors, such as elevated cortisol, obesity, or hyperlipidemia. Evidence-based
data on the nutritional treatment of acute pancreatitis
are lacking. Many practitioners argue that withholding
enteral nutrition in favor of fasting or parenteral nutrition decreases pancreatic stimulation and therefore
reduces premature activation of pancreatic enzymes.
However, pancreatic responses to nutrition may be abnormal in pancreatitis, so that enzyme activation is actually
decreased in response to lumenal nutrition. Jejunostomy
tube feeding in dogs and in humans has been tolerated in
both species. Humans display lower morbidity when fed
through such a tube compared with parenteral nutrition,
but it is unclear if this is due to worsened outcome with
total parenteral nutrition rather than a beneficial effect
of enteral nutrition alone. Luminal nutrition is associated
with reductions in the systemic inflammatory response
and in preservation of the mucosal barrier, thereby
reducing bacterial translocation. The ideal timing of
enteral nutrition is unclear. Studies in canine parvovirus
infection showed that early enteral nutrition improved
outcome and that feeding was well-tolerated irrespective
of whether patients were vomiting or regurgitating.

23/04/16 1:27 pm

Nutrition of the critically-ill dog and cat

Additional studies are required before definitive recommendations are made on the timing and type of feeding in
canine pancreatitis. Dogs with chronic pancreatitis, however, do benefit from low-fat diets (<30 g/Mcal) following
discharge. Most therapeutic diets labeled for pancreatitis
meet this criterion. Clinicians should consider the expected
caloric intake of a patient before making a dietary recommendation. Patients consuming large amounts of food to
maintain an ideal body weight would require a lower concentration of fat than dogs consuming a very small amount.
Access to high-fat treats and prepared diets intended for
consumption by the owner should be restricted.
Serum triglycerides are an important aspect of patient
monitoring as free fatty acids, very-low-density lipoprotein, and low-density lipoprotein increase in this
condition. A decrease in lipoprotein lipase, causing a subsequent increase in triglyceride and chylomicrons, has
been observed in humans but not yet in dogs. Low-fat
diets reduce the hypertriglyceridemia in many cases, and
provision of omega 3 fatty acids (EPA, DHA) could have an
additive benefit along with niacin.
Feline pancreatitis displays many features distinct
from those observed in dogs. Concurrent hepatobiliary
or inflammatory bowel disease is commonly identified in
cats affected with this condition. Premature activation of
trypsinogen has been postulated as the mechanism, but
the etiology is unclear. Cats presenting with pancreatitis
display less vomiting than dogs, and enteral feeding is
therefore less complicated. Supportive enteral feeding
tubes (nasoenteral, esophagostomy) are often recommended for feline pancreatitis, as hepatic lipidosis (discussed below) is a common clinical sequela in anorectic
cats. Jejunostomy tubes are only rarely required. Fasting
should be avoided. There is no evidence that dietary fat
restriction is necessary in cats, which is in stark contrast to the evidence and clinical experience in dogs. Cats
should receive parenteral vitamin B12 injections because
intrinsic factor, the requisite cofactor for B12 absorption,
is produced only in the pancreas in cats as opposed to
both the stomach and pancreas of dogs.

Chronic gastrointestinal disease
Acute gastroenteritis and colitis often respond to fasting,
and no specific nutritional interventions are required.
Patients may present with chronic GI complaints requiring stabilization. Such patients may suffer from malabsorption, protein-losing enteropathy, maldigestion, and
reduced total and lean body mass. Many animals will
have concurrent anorexia, and therefore consideration
of assistive feeding devices is recommended. Feeding
tubes appropriate for at-home use should be prioritized,

K22463_C025.indd 1075

1075

as a protracted period of stabilization may be required
while the underlying disease is managed. Food allergy
or intolerance is a common differential for chronic GI
disease, and diagnosis or exclusion of these conditions
requires a strict food trial. Such trials are best started
following patient discharge and only if an animal is voluntarily eating, as food aversion can develop due to perceived associations between diet and disease. Animals
with a feeding tube can begin the diet immediately. Some
authors advocate the routine use of hydrolyzed diets in
the theory that food allergy may develop in patients
with a compromised GI barrier. Novel protein diets are
the other class of diets used to assess food allergy, but
their use requires collection of a thorough diet history
to exclude the possibility that an animal has previously
received a particular protein source. Previously rare
dietary protein sources such as rabbit, kangaroo, and
venison are now available over the counter. Diet trials
should last 12 weeks, and no other proteins, treats, or flavored medications should be given.
Chronic colitis may respond to hydrolyzed or novel
protein diets. Dietary fiber and probiotics are additional
considerations. Dietary fiber is generally classified as
soluble or insoluble. Soluble fiber sources, such as gums
and beet pulp, provide substrates for bacterial fermentation. Insoluble fibers, such as cellulose and peanut
hulls, increase fecal bulk. Fiber modification influences
intestinal transit, stool consistency, bacterial flora, and
fecal moisture. Psyllium supplementation of foods has
gained considerable attention. Psyllium, a partially
fermentable fiber, contains mucilage that absorbs
water and helps to normalize GI transit. It is frequently
employed in the dietary management of feline megacolon. Probiotics, living microorganisms administered
for health effects, may influence immune responses and
nutrient absorption in the colon. Several veterinary
specific probiotics have been shown to reduce the duration of diarrhea. However, product quality has been
poor for many probiotic products marketed for animal
use. The benefits of probiotics in patients receiving concurrent antibiotics are unclear.

Hepatic lipidosis
Excessive accumulations of triglycerides in the hepatocytes of some anorectic, generally overweight cats produce hepatic dysfunction and cholestasis. The occurrence
of this condition in cats, but not in dogs, is likely related
to the metabolic peculiarities of the cat, a true carnivore.
Cats display significant mobilization of triglycerides
during fasting, which are transported to the liver for use as
energy. In lipidotic cats, however, the rate of mobilization

23/04/16 1:27 pm

1076

Elements of therapy

exceeds the rate of clearance. Carnitine complexes with
fatty acids to facilitate transport across the mitochondrial
membrane, and deficiency of this compound has been
proposed as a cause in some cats. Oxidative stress may
also be increased, and some B vitamins may be decreased
as a function of prolonged anorexia or the condition itself.
A variety of nutraceuticals have been recommended, such
as carnitine (250 mg daily), SAMe (100–200 mg daily),
B complex vitamins (added to fluids), and vitamin B12
(0.5–1 ml [500–1,000 µg] SC daily). Administration of
caloric needs is likely more important than supplementation. Supportive feeding measures should be pursued
as soon as possible in the disease course. Fat restriction
is unnecessary. Despite the intrahepatic lipid accumulation, fat ingestion, when combined with other nutrients, decreases the release of peripheral lipid stores due
to the action of insulin. High-protein diets (>90 g/Mcal)
are commonly recommended as they may support tissue
regeneration. Severely affected cats may display hepatic
encephalopathy, and in these rare cases, the protein concentration of the diet should be reduced.

Hepatic encephalopathy
Hepatic encephalopathy warrants immediate nutritional
modification following initial stabilization. In addition
to lactulose, which converts ammonia to ammonium,
thus preventing absorption, neomycin, which decreases
ammonia-producing urease-positive bacteria, and the
correction of alkalosis, which prevents worsening of
encephalopathy, dietary protein restriction is indicated in
most patients. Estimates suggest that one-third of blood
ammonia is from bacterial production and the remainder from dietary protein intake, because encephalopathic patients lack adequate urea cycle activity to convert
ammonia to blood urea nitrogen. Therefore, most dogs
with average caloric intake (90 × BW0.75 kcal/day) should
receive enough protein to prevent muscle catabolism
and provide maintenance requirements, approximately
40–50 g/Mcal. Cats, with higher protein requirements,
should receive around 70 g/Mcal. Protein-restricted diets
may also be restricted in purine content as the crude protein of the diet is derived from measurement of nitrogen,
which includes amino acids, purines, and pyrimidines.
Impaired conversion of purines to allantoin results in
increased uric acid excretion, predisposing to urate uroliths. Most therapeutic hepatic diets are appropriate for
encephalopathic patients; however, patients consuming
few calories may be fed a normal diet. Renal diets are
not commonly recommended for extended feeding of the
encephalopathic patient, as such diets tend to be alkalinizing, which worsens clinical signs. In addition to the

K22463_C025.indd 1076

standard therapies listed above, soluble fiber has been
suggested in the management of encephalopathy, mainly
due to lactulose-like effects on lowering intestinal pH.

Renal disease (see also Chapter 12: Nephrology/
urology)
Most patients with AKI or CKD do not require immediate dietary modification. Azotemia may predispose to
anorexia and nausea, and attempts to administer a new
diet can result in profound food aversion. The role of
nutrition in AKI is unclear, but it is generally accepted
that such patients have high rates of protein catabolism
and may therefore benefit from normal maintenance
diets. If animals consume little food during hospitalization, high-protein diets may even be appropriate to prevent loss of lean body mass. CKD patients can typically be
fed their historical diet during hospitalization. The effects
of diet in CKD are well studied in both dogs and cats and
directly impact survival when fed for extended periods.
Advanced stages of renal disease may require assistive
feeding tubes, primarily esophagostomy or gastrostomy,
in order to facilitate owner administration of calories and
sufficient water.
The features of most diets designed for CKD include
reduced phosphorus and protein, elevated omega 3 fatty
acids, reduced sodium, and increased caloric density.
One diet fed to dogs with stage 3 and 4 CKD permitted a
median survival time of about 600 days compared with
200 days in the control group. Similar findings of a feline
diet marketed for renal disease were reported: 633 days
versus 264 days. Another study of a different feline diet
found a median survival time of 750 days. Commercially
available kidney diets and calcitriol administration in
dogs are in fact the only interventions for which grade
I evidence exists. Different diets labeled for use in renal
disease contain different ingredients and nutrient concentrations; therefore, product guides should be carefully
reviewed if a patient requires more or less of a certain
nutrient or if one particular product is refused. The
amount of protein to administer to patients with renal
failure is controversial, and should probably be increased
to the amount needed to maintain muscle condition.
Protein does not appear as toxic to renal tubules in dogs
and cats as in rodents, but protein frequently contains a
large percentage of dietary phosphorus, which is reduced
to prevent renal secondary hyperparathyroidism. No
clinical studies exist that compare protein modification independent of phosphorus concentration. Animals
who consume little food may benefit from higher protein diets. Those patients in stage 4 renal disease (www.
iris-kidney.com) may require feeding tubes if voluntary

23/04/16 1:27 pm

Nutrition of the critically-ill dog and cat

1077

25.8

Renal disease

Energy intake?

Custom
solution

Low, maintaining
weight

Dog:
Moderate
protein and
phosphorus
Cat:
Renal diet?

Stage 2

Normal

Low, losing weight

Proteinuria

Type or IRIS stage

Stage 3

Feeding
tube

Dog:
Moderate
protein
Cat:
Renal diet

Stage 4

Renal diet or phosphorus-restricted diet
Protein restriction if uremic

Figure 25.8 An algorithm for nutritional management of patients with renal disease.

intake is insufficient to maintain body weight. Therefore,
interventions should be tailored to the patient’s caloric
intake and International Renal Interest Society (IRIS)
stage (Figure 25.8).

considerations. Additional randomized controlled trials
are needed to better c­ haracterize the influence of nutrition on patient outcome.

CONCLUSION

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING

Critical care patients benefit from frequent nutritional
assessments during hospitalization. Controversies exist
regarding when, how, and what to feed ­
critically-ill
patients. However, most conditions benefit from a methodical approach to nutritional support. Those animals with
significant anorexia, hyporexia, or reduction in MCS or
BCS may require earlier interventions compared with
animals who present with acute illness and adequate tissue reserves. Certain conditions such as sepsis may benefit from permissive underfeeding. In many conditions,
the provision of some calories is preferred compared with
no calories or caloric excess. Specific attention should be
given to patients presenting with GI disease, pancreatitis, hepatic encephalopathy, hepatic lipidosis, and renal
disease, as these conditions have well-defined nutritional

Brunetto MA, Gomes MO, Andre MR et al. (2010) Effects of
­nutritional support on hospital outcome in dogs and cats.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 20:224–231.
Casaer MP, Van den Berghe G (2014) Nutrition in the acute
phase of illness. New Engl J Med 370:1227–1236.
Desai SV, McClave SA, Rice TW (2014) Nutrition in the ICU: an
evidence-based approach. Chest 140:1148–1157.
Fascetti AJ, Delaney SJ (2012) (eds.) Applied Veterinary Clinical
Nutrition. Wiley-Blackwell, Ames.
Han E (2004) Esophageal and gastric feeding tubes in ICU
patients. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 19:22–31.
Kirk C (2006) (ed.) Dietary management and nutrition. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 36:1183–1410.
Mohr AJ, Leisewitz AL, Jacobson LS et al. (2003) Effect of early
enteral nutrition on intestinal permeability, intestinal
protein loss, and outcome in dogs with severe parvoviral
enteritis. J Vet Intern Med 17:791–798.

K22463_C025.indd 1077

23/04/16 1:27 pm

1078

Elements of therapy

National Research Council Subcommittee on Dog and Cat
Nutrition (2003) Nutrient Requirements of Dogs and Cats.
National Academies Press, Washington DC.
Pibot P, Biourge V, Elliot D (2006) Encyclopedia of Canine Clinical
Nutrition. Aniwa SAS, Aimargues.
Pibot P, Biourge V, Elliot D (2008) Encyclopedia of Feline Clinical
Nutrition. Aniwa SAS, Aimargues.
Queau Y, Larsen JA, Kass PH et al. (2011) Factors ­associated
with adverse outcomes during parenteral ­nutrition
­administration in dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med 25:446–452.

K22463_C025.indd 1078

Schuetz P, Bally M, Stanga Z et al. (2014) Loss of appetite in
acutely ill medical inpatients: physiological response or
therapeutic target. Schweiz Med Wochenschr 144:w13957.
Yu MK, Freeman LM, Heinze CR et al. (2013) Comparison of
complication rates in dogs with nasoesophageal versus
nasogastric feeding tubes. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 23:300–304.

23/04/16 1:27 pm

1079

Chapter 26
Management of the obese dog or cat
Alexander J. German

DEFINITION AND OVERVIEW
Human obesity
In humans, obesity is defined as a disease in which
­adipose tissue has been accumulated to the point that
health can be adversely affected. There are various
methods of quantifying adiposity in people, the most
common of which is the body mass index (BMI; weight
[in kg] divided by height2 [in m]). Although not perfect,
for the majority of the human population, this measure
approximates to body fat mass. Epidemiologic studies
have suggested that the optimal BMI for adult Caucasians
is 20–25, and have further demonstrated that disease and
mortality risk progressively increase when BMI exceeds
this. Increased BMI has been categorized into ‘overweight’
(BMI 25–30), ‘obese’ (BMI 30–40), and morbidly obese (BMI
>40), with each representing a progressive increase in disease and mortality risk. Some recent work has questioned
whether people with an overweight BMI are genuinely at
an increased risk of mortality and developing concurrent disease. This phenomenon might be explained by
confounding, since some people with an ideal BMI have
a concurrent disease that has caused them to lose weight.
There has been a dramatic increase in the prevalence of
this disease in the human population. According to the
Centers for Disease Control in the USA, more than a third
(35%) of adults are obese. However, this is not a problem
that is limited to the westernized world and, indeed, the
Overseas Development Institute has recently highlighted
a growing concern in developing countries, with almost
a billion adults now being classed as obese. Thus, obesity
truly is an epidemic of global proportions.

Canine and feline obesity
As with humans, excess adiposity in companion a
­ nimals
can be categorized either as overweight or as obese,
depending on the degree with which current weight
exceeds ideal weight. Rather than using a measure equivalent to the BMI, most veterinarians will classify on the
basis of the body condition score (BCS) (see Figure 25.1).

K22463_C026.indd 1079

The WSAVA Global Nutrition Committee has recently recommended using the 9-integer unit BCS, with BCS 4/9–
5/9 being ideal, 6/9–7/9 being overweight, and 8/9–9/9
being obese. Given that beyond 5/9 each integer unit represents ~10–15% of excess weight, overweight animals
are typically up to 20% above their ideal weight, while
obese dogs are >20% above ideal. As in humans, various
studies have suggested that adverse health effects can
arise when dogs and cats are not maintained in optimal
body condition. A number of recent international studies
have determined the prevalence of excess body weight in
dogs and cats: for dogs, 29–39% are defined as overweight
and 5–20% as obese, while, for cats, 19–29% are defined
as overweight and 8–10% as obese. Differences represent
variations in the populations studied and methodology. Furthermore, as with human obesity, prevalence is
increasing, with recent reports suggesting a 37% and 90%
increase in prevalence over the last 5 years for dogs and
cats, respectively.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Etiology
For body weight to remain stable, energy intake in food
must match expenditure from basal metabolic rate, activity, and thermoregulation. When energy intake exceeds
expenditure, usually as a result of a number of risk
factors, the net energy gained is stored in body fat.
Adipose tissue can expand both by hypertrophy and/
or hyperplasia: in some individuals, the response to
energy imbalance is adipocyte hypertrophy while for
others ­hyperplasia predominates, with a lesser degree of
hypertrophy. Differences in the degree of hyperplasia to
­hypertrophy have recently been shown to be associated
with the metabolic derangements that manifest as a result
of obesity. Intriguingly, recent research has demonstrated
that some cats can maintain a stable weight despite
ad-­libitum feeding, likely by self-­
regulating intake.
However, others are unable to do this and, if excess intake
remains unchecked, weight gain develops gradually.

23/04/16 1:29 pm

1080

Elements of therapy

Thus, slow and insidious energy imbalance is a major
factor, perhaps explaining why obesity is most prevalent
in middle aged dogs and cats.

Pathophysiology
The clinical significance of obesity relates not to the
­accumulation of adipose tissue per se, but to the effect
this has on the function of other organs. There are two
proposed mechanisms for such effects: ‘mechanical’ and
‘endocrine’. Mechanical effects can occur from excessive
weight of adipose tissue, and this can cause excessive
loading of structures of the musculoskeletal system.
Alternatively, effects may arise from the excess volume
of the tissue and the effect this has on compressible structures, for instance of the respiratory (affecting breathing function) or urinary (causing incontinence) system.
In addition, the excess volume and weight can affect the
ability to groom, while the insulating effect of adipose
tissue can create problems with reduced heat dissipation.
However, in addition to these mechanical problems,
there may be effects due to derangement of the endocrine functions of white adipose tissue. A range of cytokines, chemokines, and other inflammation-related
proteins, collectively termed ‘adipokines’, are now known
to be synthesized, suggesting that adipose tissue can
influence the function of a variety of organ systems
(Figures 26.1a, b). When there is expansion of adipose
tissue, it can become hypoxic, causing derangement in
adipokine synthesis and release. This can lead to a body
wide state of chronic mild inflammation and, ultimately,
to a range of end effects. In humans, increases in the production of certain inflammatory adipokines (e.g. leptin,
tumor necrosis factor a, interleukin 6, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1, and haptoglobin) have been causally
linked to the development of metabolic syndrome and
other disorders linked to the obese state. As mentioned
above, adipose tissue can expand both by hypertrophy
(through increased cell size) and hyperplasia (through
synthesis of new cells from preadipocytes). Individuals
that predominantly react by adipocyte hypertrophy have
greater hepatic fat deposition and more marked metabolic disturbances than those who do not. It is thought
that these differences may arise through mitochondrial
dysfunction, since the same studies demonstrated that
mitochondrial gene expression pathways are downregulated, while inflammatory pathways are upregulated in
the adipose tissue of affected individuals.
Inflammatory adipokine gene expression has been
documented in both canine and feline white adipose
tissue, and studies are now highlighting their effects in
these species. As with humans, metabolic derangements

K22463_C026.indd 1080

are most evident. Increased plasma leptin ­concentrations
have been shown to be independently associated with
insulin sensitivity in lean and overweight cats. Other
studies indicate decreased circulating adiponectin in
obese dogs and cats, and this is also linked to insulin
resistance. Furthermore, low serum adiponectin has
been associated with failure of a subsequent weight loss
program and excessive lean tissue loss during weight
26.1

a

Fatty acids

Fed

Glucose

Fatty acids

Fasted

Glycerol

SECRETORY & ENDOCRINE GLAND
Appetite & energy balance
Leptin & adiponectin
Neurotrophins
NGF

Chemokines
MCP–1 & MIF

b

Hemostatic &
hemodynamic factors
Angiotensinogen, PAI–1

Cytokines
TNF–a, IL–1b, IL–6,
IL–10, IL–18, TGF–b

Fatty acids, glycerol,
cholesterol & steroid
hormones

Acute phase proteins
SAA, CRP, methallothionein,
haptoglobin

Figures 26.1a, b Evolving views of the biological functions
of adipose tissue. (a) Adipocytes were previously considered
to be inert storage depots releasing fuel as fatty acids and
glycerol at times of fasting or starvation. (b) Recently, however,
it has become increasingly clear that adipocytes are endocrine
cells, which secrete important hormones, cytokines, vasoactive
substances, and other peptides. This figure outlines the range
of such proteins secreted from adipose tissue. CRP, C-reactive
protein; IL, interleukin; MCP-1, monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1; MIF, macrophage migration inhibitory factor; PAI-1,
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1; SAA, serum amyloid A;
TGF-b, transforming growth factor-b; TNF-a, tumor necrosis
factor-a. (From German AJ, Ryan VH, German AC et al. (2010)
Obesity, its associated disorders and the role of inflammatory
adipokines in companion animals. Vet J 185:4–9, reprinted with
permission.)

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Management of the obese dog or cat

management. Increases in serum paraoxanase 1 have
also recently been demonstrated and, once again, this is
associated with insulin resistance. Further work is ongoing to better characterize these effects.

1081

Age

A number of risk factors are known to predispose to the
development of obesity in dogs and cats, as outlined
below.

As mentioned above, the prevalence of both canine and
feline obesity gradually increases throughout life, with
the condition being most prevalent in middle aged animals. However, some individuals can become overweight
even during growth. The prevalence of overweight and
obesity decreases in senior animals, possibly due to the
onset of various chronic diseases associated with the
aging process.

Co-existing health problems

Sex and neutering

Some diseases, such as hyperadrenocorticism, can cause
polyphagia, and if the animal is allowed to consume more
food, weight gain can occur. Other diseases can reduce
energy expenditure, for instance by decreasing physical
activity or slowing the basal metabolic rate. Orthopedic
diseases that lead to lameness are a classic example of a disease that decreases activity, while hypothyroidism is, perhaps, the best example of a disease predisposing to weight
gain by decreasing metabolic rate. Although thought to
be a common endocrinopathy, relatively speaking, hypothyroidism is actually an uncommon cause of obesity in
dogs. In this respect, the prevalence of hypothyroidism is
reported to be <1%, and less than half are overweight (see
Chapter 11: Endocrine disorders), while the current prevalence of dogs that are above their ideal weight is much
greater (typically 34–59%); thus, only a minority of the
overweight dogs attending veterinary practices are likely
to have concurrent hypothyroidism. Furthermore, given
that hypothyroidism is extremely rare in cats, it is a negligible cause of obesity in this species.
Beyond this, some therapeutic interventions can predispose to weight gain. One example is the use of drugs
that stimulate appetite (e.g. glucocorticoids or anticonvulsants), but not energy requirement; here weight gain can
occur if the owner provides more food. A second example
is surgical sterilization (spaying/neutering), which alters
behavior by decreasing physical activity while increasing
food-­seeking behavior.

Some canine studies have suggested that female dogs are
predisposed, while a recent feline study suggested males
to be overrepresented. More importantly, neutering is
an important risk factor for obesity in both species, with
studies suggesting that this is the result of behavioral
alterations rather than a direct effect on metabolism.
In this respect, the hormonal changes produced by obesity lead to an increased food intake, decreased physical
activity, or both. Given that neutering is typically an elective procedure, unwanted post-neutering weight gain is
arguably preventable if body weight is monitored closely
and food intake adjusted accordingly (see below).

Rapid early-life weight gain

Dogs and cats that live indoors are reportedly at greater
risk of developing obesity than those who go outside. Similar findings have also been seen for indoor
cats, including those that are apartment dwelling.
Furthermore, cats that live with one or two other cats or
with a dog may also be at increased risk.

Risk factors for the development of obesity

In humans, overly rapid gain of weight during the early
years of life predicts the likelihood of being obese during
adulthood. A similar phenomenon has recently been
identified in cats. Although the reason for this phenomenon is not yet known, genetic factors are suggested to
play a role. Armed with such knowledge, a simple comparison of the ratio of bodyweight between 2 months
(i.e. 2nd vaccination) and 12 months of age (first annual
booster) could be used to identify at-risk cats, enabling
preventive strategies to be implemented (see below).

K22463_C026.indd 1081

Breed
On rare occasions, single gene disorders can cause obesity in humans, but polygenic effects are more common
with a number of predisposing genes recently identified.
At the current time, no single-gene disorders have been
described in either dogs or cats. Since there are a number
of known breed predispositions in both dogs (e.g. Cocker
Spaniels, Beagles, Labrador Retrievers, Golden Retrievers,
Shetland Sheepdogs, Rottweilers, and mixed-breed dogs)
and cats (e.g. Domestic Shorthair), genetic influences
remain likely, although these are more likely to be due
to polygenic effects. Gene mapping studies are underway
to characterize the genetic influences in these companion
animals.

Environment and activity

Dietary factors
Some published studies have suggested associations
between companion animal obesity and diet type, but
others have not. In one study, no difference in obesity

23/04/16 1:29 pm

1082

Elements of therapy

prevalence was observed between dogs fed commercial
food versus those fed a homemade diet. However, the
cost of food might play a role, with inexpensive (‘grocery
store’) diets more likely to have been fed to obese dogs
compared with more expensive foods; in contrast, obese
cats are more likely to have been fed a premium food.
Although, there have been many anecdotal suggestions
that feeding a high carbohydrate diet to cats predisposes
to obesity and diabetes mellitus, there is no evidence
to support this assertion. In fact, increased dietary fat
rather than carbohydrate predisposes to weight gain in
cats. Furthermore, obese cats more commonly have free
choice of food intake. For dogs, obesity is correlated with
the number of meals and snacks, the feeding of table
scraps, and the animal being present when owners prepared or ate their own meal.

Owner factors and behavior
The owners of overweight dogs have a lower income
than dogs of ideal weight, but this is not the case for cats.
Owners of obese dogs also tend overhumanize them,
and this is also the case for cats, where owners often utilize their cat as a substitute for human companionship.
Owners of overweight cats also spend less time playing
with their pet, and reward with food rather than extra
play. Owners of both overweight cats and dogs are more
likely to be overweight themselves, less interested in
preventive health, and to observe their pet more closely
during feeding.
Some studies have suggested that there may be behavioral influences on the development of feline obesity,
including anxiety, depression, failure to establish normal feeding behavior, and failure to develop control
of satiety. The human–animal relationship is also of
importance, and appears to be more intense in owners of
obese cats. Cat owners usually feed their cats two meals
per day, even though the wild ancestors of domestic cats
are ‘trickle feeders’ and eat many small meals each day.
Misinterpretation of feline behavior on the part of the
owner is a critical factor in feline obesity, with owners
misreading behavior signals with regard to eating. In
this respect, domestic cats prefer to eat alone and have no
requirement for social interaction during this time. Thus,
when a cat initiates contact, this would not normally be
for food-related reasons. However, owners often mistakenly believe their cat to be hungry and asking for food;
if they give food at this point, the cat will quickly learn
that initiating contact results in a food reward. Another
misconception is that it is only young cats that need play
activity, but this is needed throughout life. Therefore,

K22463_C026.indd 1082

most cat owners do not bother to play with their cat once
it has reached adulthood.

PATHOLOGICAL CONSEQUENCES
OF OBESITY
Obesity-associated disorders in humans
(Table 26.1)
Obesity is known to have a number of significant effects
on the human body, the most notable of which is metabolic syndrome, whereby metabolic and vascular
derangements develop that predispose the individual to
type II diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease. As
fat mass increases (especially within the abdomen), so
does the severity of insulin resistance and, ultimately
type II diabetes mellitus. Given this close association, it
is not surprising that the prevalence of type II diabetes
mellitus has increased at an equivalent rate to that of
obesity. Obesity, through metabolic syndrome, also leads
to cardiovascular disease, with an associated increased
prevalence of coronary heart disease, atherosclerosis,
hypertension, and dyslipidemias in people who are overweight. Most notably, metabolic syndrome is a predictor
of a future vascular event and, therefore, its presence
should prompt interventions aimed at reducing the risk
of such problems.
Other obesity-associated co-morbidities include respiratory disorders (especially sleep apnea and asthma),
kidney disease (especially diabetic nephropathy),
and osteoarthritis. Obesity is now the most important
cause of liver disease, given the increased likelihood of
affected patients developing steatosis, cirrhosis, and
hepatocellular carcinoma. Obesity also increases the
­
risk of ­certain types of cancer, most notably affecting
the breast, ­
prostate, ovary, colon/rectum, kidney, and
esophagus.

Obesity-associated disorders in companion
animals (Table 26.1)
Life span
In a long-term prospective study, restricting caloric
intake (by approximately 25%) in dogs was shown to
maintain optimal body condition (BCS 4.5/9 vs. 6.8/9),
and extend life span (based on time to euthanasia) by
almost 2 years. In the same study, the restricted dogs
were less likely to develop hip dysplasia (during growth)
and ­
osteoarthritis later in life (especially of the hip
and shoulder joint). Finally, these dogs had improved
glucose ­
tolerance and lower circulating triglyceride

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Management of the obese dog or cat

1083

Table 26.1 Diseases associated with overweight and obesity in humans, dogs, and cats. (From German AJ, Ryan VH, German AC et al.
(2010) Obesity, its associated disorders and the role of inflammatory adipokines in companion animals. Vet J 185:4–9, reprinted with
permission.)
Disease category

Species
Human

Dog

Cat

Endocrine and lipid

Type II diabetes, metabolic
syndrome, dyslipidemias

Hypothyroidism,
hyperadrenocorticism,
diabetes mellitus, insulin
resistance, metabolic syndrome
(experimental)

Diabetes mellitus, hepatic
lipidosis

Cardiorespiratory

Coronary heart disease,
atherosclerosis, hypertension,
obstructive sleep apnea,
asthma

Tracheal collapse, expiratory
airway dysfunction
(experimental), hypertension (of
doubtful clinical significance),
portal vein thrombosis,
myocardial hypoxia

Orthopedic and impaired
mobility

Osteoarthritis,
musculoskeletal pain, gout

Osteoarthritis, cruciate ligament
disease, humeral condylar
fractures, intervertebral disk
disease, hip dysplasia

Increased lameness

Oncological

Various cancers including:
breast (post-menopausal),
renal, endometrial, prostatic,
esophageal, colonic/rectal,
hepatocellular carcinoma

Variable neoplasia risk:
transitional cell carcinoma,
mammary carcinoma (some but
not all studies)

Increased neoplasia risk

Urogenital

Diabetic nephropathy

Urinary tract disease, urethral
sphincter mechanism
incompetence, calcium oxalate
urolithiasis, transitional cell
carcinoma, glomerular disease
(experimental), dystocia

Increased risk of urinary tract
disease

Alimentary

Pancreatitis, hepatic steatosis,
cirrhosis

Pancreatitis

Increased oral cavity disease
and gastrointestinal disease

Other

Depression, postoperative
complications, various
dermatologic diseases

Immune function

Increased risk of dermatoses

concentrations ­
compared with the ad libitum fed and
overweight dogs.

Quality of life effects
In a recent study, health-related quality of life was
assessed in obese dogs before and after weight loss.
Quality of life was worse than for dogs at optimal weight,
but improved as a result of successful weight loss. These
effects were most notable for ‘vitality’ factors, which
improved dramatically, and there was also less evidence of factors indicating chronic pain and emotional

K22463_C026.indd 1083

derangements. Moreover, the more body fat the dog lost,
the greater the improvement in vitality. Dogs that failed
to complete their weight loss program had worse quality
of life at the outset than those successfully losing weight,
most notably worse vitality and greater emotional
disturbance.

Orthopedic disorders
Of all disease associations the link between obesity
and orthopedic disease is most important in dogs. An
increased prevalence of a variety of orthopedic disorders

23/04/16 1:29 pm

1084

Elements of therapy

has been noted including cranial cruciate ligament
­rupture, ­intervertebral disk disease, humeral condylar
fractures, hip dysplasia, and osteoarthritis. Based on
force plate analysis, weight reduction in obese dogs with
osteoarthritis can lead to a substantial improvement in
mobility.
As with dogs, obesity may be a risk factor for feline
orthopedic disease. One study suggested that obese cats
were five times more likely to be lame than normal condition cats, although not all studies confirm this finding.
Further work is required to determine whether obesity
truly has a causal effect on feline orthopedic disorders
and, if so, what diseases specifically.

Hyperlipidemia and dyslipidemia

Endocrine and metabolic diseases

Respiratory function

In dogs, associations between obesity and diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and hyperadrenocorticism have
been demonstrated; for cats, the only association is with
diabetes mellitus. Cats most often suffer from a form of
diabetes mellitus resembling human ‘type II’ diabetes,
with insulin resistance being a major factor. Successful
weight loss improves insulin sensitivity, significantly
reducing the requirement for exogenous insulin therapy.
In diabetic dogs, there is progressive beta cell loss and
absolute insulin deficiency, meaning that an affected dog
will always need lifelong insulin therapy. The pathogenesis of beta cell loss is poorly understood, and might not
be the same as human type I diabetes. Putative causes
include pancreatitis and autoimmune-mediated beta
cell destruction. Furthermore, a large scale epidemiological study in dogs demonstrated an association between
obesity and diabetes mellitus. Since obese dogs are also
prone to pancreatitis, it might be that concurrence of this
condition provides the causal link with diabetes mellitus.
However, insulin resistance may also play a role because
it is known to occur in experimental models of canine
obesity. Indeed, a recent study of naturally occurring
obesity in dogs has demonstrated that the percentage of
body fat correlates with the degree of insulin resistance,
and insulin sensitivity is improved significantly on successful weight loss.
Obesity can have marginal effects on thyroid homeostasis, but the changes are not biologically significant and
are unlikely to affect the interpretation of thyroid function tests. In this respect, obese dogs have slightly greater
total thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3) concentrations than ideal weight dogs, but generally remain
within the reference interval, and free T4, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), and TSH tests are not significantly
different.

A number of studies have now demonstrated that excessive body fat can adversely affect respiratory function in dogs, and the same is likely to be true in cats.
Such effects are similar to those seen in humans, and
may help to explain the link between obesity and certain respiratory diseases in dogs, most notably tracheal collapse, laryngeal paralysis, and brachycephalic
airway obstruction syndrome. The exact nature of the
effects on respiratory function differs depending on the
study. In one experimental study, airway resistance was
markedly increased during hyperpnea but not when
breathing normally. A second study demonstrated that
obese dogs had a decreased tidal volume and increased
respiratory rate, as well as increased airway reactivity. In a further study, obesity had a significant effect
on oxygenation but not on oxygenation indices, being
most closely negatively associated with thoracic fat
percentage. Finally, in a further study, obesity was
shown to negatively effect cardiopulmonary function,
as determined by the 6-minute walk test. The human
term ‘Pickwickian syndrome’ is sometimes used to
describe respiratory impairment in morbidly obese pet
animals. This s taken from Charles Dickens’ character
Mr. Pickwick, who showed the signs that the syndrome
is named after.

K22463_C026.indd 1084

Feline obesity has long been known to predispose to
hepatic lipidosis, and epidemiological studies have confirmed this link. Experimental studies in obese dogs
have demonstrated mild (but likely clinically insignificant) hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and
increased circulating phospholipid concentrations. In
contrast, experimental studies of canine obesity have
demonstrated increased plasma nonesterified fatty
acid and triglyceride concentrations (increased verylow-­
density lipoprotein and high-density lipoprotein;
decreased high-density lipoprotein cholesterol), which
associate with insulin resistance.

Cardiac function
In dogs, obesity is known to affect cardiac function, as
demonstrated by alterations in cardiac rhythm and
increases in left ventricular volume; there is no evidence
of a similar association in cats. However, overweight cats
with heart failure have reduced survival times compared
with cats in normal body condition. Mild hypertension
does occur in canine obesity, but the effect has not yet
been shown to be as clinically significant as in humans.

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Management of the obese dog or cat

Finally, obesity in dogs may be associated with portal
vein thrombosis and myocardial hypoxia.

Neoplasia
Although epidemiological studies have demonstrated
an association between obesity and the presence of neoplasia in both dogs and cats, such a link has not been
confirmed in all studies. Other studies have examined
associations with specific cancer types and, although not
conclusive, links have been suggested with transitional
cell carcinoma and mammary carcinoma.

Renal system function and disease
In experimental dogs, the onset of obesity is associated
with glomerular pathology and changes in function,
including increased plasma renin and insulin concentrations, mean arterial pressure, and renal blood flow.
In a more recent study, a number of renal biomarkers
were assessed in obese dogs with evidence of subclinical
decreases in renal function, which improved after weight
loss. However, it is unclear as to the significance of these
changes and, most importantly, whether or not they may
predispose to renal disease, as in humans. Associations
have also been demonstrated between obesity and urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence, while obese
animals have an increased risk of dystocia.

Other disorders
Epidemiological studies have demonstrated associations
between feline obesity and oral cavity disease, dermatologic disorders, and diarrhea. However, the reasons for
such an association are not known.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Obesity is typically a disorder that develops insidiously
and is most commonly seen in early middle age, with
peak prevalence occurring in 6–10-year-old dogs and
5–11-year-old cats. In both species, prevalence declines in
old age, and is also less in growing dogs. The disease can
be seen in dogs and cats of either sex and typically (but
not always) they are neutered. Any breed may be affected,
although there are certain predispositions including
Cocker Spaniels, Beagles, Labrador Retrievers, Golden
Retrievers, Shetland Sheepdogs, Rottweilers, and mixedbreed dogs.
Clinical signs vary depending on how overweight the
dog or cat is and the extent of obesity-associated diseases.
Common signs directly attributable to the obesity include
lethargy, exercise intolerance, increased respiratory rate

K22463_C026.indd 1085

1085

and effort, abnormal respiratory tract sounds (e.g. stertor and stridor, often commonly while recumbent or
sleeping), and altered gait (typically due to the mechanical effects of excessive truncal and limb fat deposition).
Appetite can be variable; while some dogs are polyphagic
and scavenging, some owners may report that their dog
has a picky appetite and does not eat all of the food in its
bowl. The latter is thought to be due to owners providing
food vastly in excess of requirements and, often, giving
significant numbers of food-based rewards. This means
that the dog or cat can still overeat despite not eating
everything they are given. Examples of clinical signs
include lameness (orthopedic disease), abdominal pain
(pancreatitis), vomiting (pancreatitis, hepatic lipidosis),
icterus (hepatic lipidosis), polydipsia and polyuria (diabetes mellitus), coughing (respiratory disease), and incontinence (urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence).
On physical examination, altered body shape is always
readily apparent, most easily determined using body
condition scoring (see below). There may be signs of an
associated disease, for instance abdominal pain with
pancreatitis or pain on joint manipulation. Poor skin and
coat condition is often present, and cats that are markedly obese often have fecal soiling of the perineum due
to inability to groom. In dogs with concurrent hypothyroidism or hyperadrenocorticism, alopecia and other typical skin changes may also be evident. Auscultation and
abdominal palpation can be problematic given excess
truncal fat deposition, both subcutaneously and within
both body cavities. Likewise, while a pulse is usually palpable, it can be more difficult to determine pulse quality
due to excess subcutaneous fat in the inguinal region.
Thoracic auscultation can be muffled because of intraand extrathorasic fat deposits.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
In addition to body fat mass accumulation, other possible reasons for weight gain include changes in hydration
status (usually iatrogenic) and intracavitary fluid accumulation (e.g. ascites). In such cases, the weight change
is rapid and other signs are expected. Thus, they can be
readily distinguished from weight gain due to obesity.
In male cats, gradual weight gain can also arise secondary to acromegaly, although weight gain results from
increases in muscle mass, organomegaly, and increased
bone mass, in addition to adipose tissue. Therefore, this
can usually be distinguished on physical examination;
however, this might be counteracted by co-existing diabetes mellitus.

23/04/16 1:29 pm

1086

Elements of therapy

Therefore, if weight gain is gradual, obesity is the
most likely cause and the aim of the clinician is to distinguish ‘simple obesity’ (due to energy imbalance) from
cases that have arisen secondary to another disease, most
notably hyperadrenocorticism or hypothyroidism (dogs).
Other than this, possible differential diagnoses relate to
the presence of other signs that may have developed secondary to associated diseases. Such lists can sometimes
be extensive, given that the signs associated with obesity
can be both diverse and nonspecific, and the diagnosis of
simple obesity can only be made once other possibilities
have been adequately excluded. Therefore, the differential diagnosis list needs to be tailored to the individual
case. For example, in cases presenting with respiratory
tract signs, consideration should be given to other possibilities that present insidiously in middle age such as
upper respiratory tract diseases (e.g. laryngeal paralysis, brachycephalic airway disease), airway diseases
(e.g. chronic airway disease), pulmonary disease (e.g.
pulmonary neoplasia), and other intrathoracic diseases.
In a similar manner, tailored differential diagnosis lists
should be created when there are signs of lameness, vomiting, abdominal pain, and incontinence.

DIAGNOSIS
The overall aim is to confirm that the weight gain is the
result of increased adipose tissue mass, determine which
risk factors are present, and determine whether there is
evidence of an underlying cause (e.g. endocrinopathy,
iatrogenic weight gain) and whether other concurrent
diseases might be present. In addition, the clinician
should aim to determine current health status (which
will influence how the case is investigated and managed)
and quantify the degree of obesity. With regard to health
status it is critical to identify all concurrent diseases,
whether or not they are likely to be directly related to
the obesity. This will then enable the clinician to determine the most appropriate plan for weight management,
determine both the ideal weight and an appropriate
target weight, and also to decide on the safest and most
effective approach for weight loss. The exact tests that are
required in the individual case can then be decided.

History and physical examination
The first stage of diagnosis is to obtain a history, including
diet history, and perform a physical examination. In addition to a standard medical history (including any prior
or current therapy), the history should include details
of diet, exercise, environment, the family unit (pets and
people), lifestyle, and neuter status. Physical examination

K22463_C026.indd 1086

should focus on quantifying the obesity and ­determining
the presence of associated diseases that are either causing or contributing to weight gain or ­
presenting as
incidental findings.

Body weight measurement
The dog or cat should be weighed on electronic scales that,
ideally, have been calibrated for precision and accuracy,
as well as being serviced regularly (e.g. annually). If test
weights are not available, an item of known weight can
be used instead (e.g. bag of dry dog food). It is advisable
for the practice always to use the same set of electronic
weigh scales for weight measurements, since this will
minimize errors from readings obtained with different
sets of scales. Adopting a practice policy of weighing all
animals at every visit throughout life is recommended,
combined with regular BCS assessment (see below); given
that most cases of obesity develop later in life, there may
be a historical record of an early adult weight (i.e. 1 year
for cats, 2 years for dogs), where the animal was in ideal
condition. This can be used to estimate the ideal weight of
the patient (see below).

Clinical assessment of body shape and
composition
Body condition scoring
The most widely accepted clinical method of assessing
body composition is body condition scoring. BCS schemes
assess adipose tissue mass through visual assessment
and palpation. Although a number of methods are available, including a modification called the body fat index,
the WSAVA Global Nutrition Committee has recently recommended the use of the 9-integer unit system, with an
additional assessment for muscle mass (as + or –) (see
Figures 25.1, 25.2). This ensures consistency amongst
clinicians.
Systems for determining BCS are the simplest indirect
measures of body composition currently available. Such
systems are repeatable when used by trained individuals, and correlate well with body fat mass measured by
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA), although
owners tend to underestimate the shape of their dogs.
BCSs can also be used determine how overweight a
patient is, with each point (for a 9-unit system) correlating with ~10–15% of excess total body weight. This will
enable the degree of obesity to be determined, and will
enable the ideal weight to be estimated (Box 26.1). BCSs
should also be used periodically during the weight program to check on progress and adjust target weight if
required. However, this should not be done too frequently,
as changes in body composition are relatively insensitive

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Management of the obese dog or cat

Box 26.1 Calculations for estimating ideal weight in
obese cats and dogs.
In published studies, each unit on a 9-point BCS scheme
approximates to 10% of excess body weight. Therefore, a
simple equation can be used to estimate the ideal weight
of a dog or cat from current body weight and BCS:
Current weight = 50 kg
↓
Current condition score = 9/9 (~40% overweight)
↓
Ideal weight = 50 kg – (50 × 40/100) = 30 kg.
Note: While this is a reasonable guide, due to individual
variability, this equation can over- or underestimate
ideal weight. If necessary, as weight loss progresses,
adjustments to the estimated ideal weight may be needed.

with, on average, a 10% change in body weight being
required to change scores.

Zoometry
Various zoometric approaches have been described, usually performed with a tape measure. Measurements that
correlate with overall ‘stature’ (e.g. head, thorax, and limb
length) are combined with measures that ­correlate with
adiposity (e.g. body weight and body [thorax, ­abdomen,
or neck] circumference). Equations are then used to predict body fat mass from these measurements. An early
example was the Feline Body Mass Index™ while, more
recently, a new zoometric system (Hill's Healthy Weight
Protocol) was reported, which used a c­ombination of
four (dog) or six (cat) measurements. Both of these
­systems correlate well with body fat mass measured by
DEXA. However, while these may be more objective than
traditional BCS assessment, it is arguable as to whether
or not they offer any real advantage. In this respect, they
are more complicated to perform and require greater
patient compliance. In addition, they may be more prone
to errors of inaccuracy amongst investigators (who may
measure differently) or to small patients (where minor
errors in measurements could have a profound effect).
Finally, the accuracy of such measurements decreases as
patients become leaner.
Bioimpedance is another noninvasive method potentially applicable to first-opinion practice. However, handheld machines designed for dogs can be unreliable, and
are inferior to body condition scoring. Finally, photographs can provide a subjective means of demonstrating longer term changes in body weight to clients, thus

K22463_C026.indd 1087

1087

highlighting success (Figures 26.2a–f). Techniques for
indirect body condition assessment from photographs
have also been described.

Further investigations
Routine hematologic examination, clinical biochemistry, and urinalysis can provide general information on
health, but are not essential in all cases. Such procedures
are more commonly performed in older animals or in
animals where there are concerns about concurrent disease (based on the historical and physical examination
findings). Depending on the case and the judgment of the
attending clinician (i.e. if there is a suspicion of an associated disease), additional investigations may be required
in some circumstances, with the exact tests required
being at the discretion of the clinician. For instance,
some cases may require measurement of blood pressure, assessment of thyroid and adrenal gland function
in dogs, pancreatic enzyme measurement, fructosamine
measurement for diabetes mellitus, survey radiography
for possible orthopedic and respiratory disease, abdominal ultrasonography (most commonly to assess pancreas,
liver, adrenal glands, kidneys, and lower urinary tract),
fine-needle aspiration cytology, and/or liver biopsy (for
suspected hepatic lipidosis). Bacterial culture of urine,
bladder ultrasonography, and radiographic contrast
studies might also be needed for cases presenting with
lower urinary tract diseases.

Other investigations
Advanced body composition measurement
Body composition can be assessed in various ways.
DEXA is precise and reliable, and has been used extensively in research studies and in referral clinical practice
(Figures 26.3a–c). It can help to determine ideal body
weight, and also be used to monitor progress with weight
loss (i.e. determining loss of lean tissue). However, it is
a specialist procedure, so is not needed in first opinion
practice, where simpler methods suffice. Instead, such
procedures should be considered for problem cases where
weight loss has been problematic despite instigating a
weight management regime (see below).
Other advanced techniques, which have been validated for use in dogs and cats, include CT and MRI. Such
techniques are arguably better at determining regional
body fat mass distribution than DEXA. However, they are
more expensive and again are limited to referral institutions and have limited availability; once again, therefore,
they are more appropriate for referral rather than primary care cases. Finally, assessment of total body water

23/04/16 1:29 pm

1088

Elements of therapy

26.2

a

d

b

e

c

f

Figures 26.2a–f (a–c) Photographs of an obese 5-year-old neutered female Labrador Retriever, weighing 49.0 kg (108.0 lb), and
with a body condition score of 9/9. (d–f) Photographs of the same dog, 268 days later, after successful weight loss on a high-protein
high-fiber diet. Body weight had decreased to 33.6 kg (74.1 lb), and condition score was 5/9. Total weight lost was 31% of starting
body weight, at a rate of 0.8%/week.

K22463_C026.indd 1088

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Management of the obese dog or cat

1089

26.3

a

b

c

K22463_C026.indd 1089

Figures 26.3a–c Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA)
as a noninvasive means of determining body composition. (a)
A fan-beam DEXA machine. (b) Image from a pre-weight-loss
DEXA scan performed on the dog featured in Figure 26.2; body
fat mass was estimated to be 51%. (c) Post-weight-loss DEXA
scan from the dog featured in Figure 26.2 demonstrating that
body fat mass had declined to 36%. Based on the DEXA figures,
the estimated composition of the body tissue lost was 83% fat
and 17% lean.

23/04/16 1:29 pm

1090

Elements of therapy

(typically using isotope studies) has been used extensively in a research setting for determining body composition in dogs and cats. However, such methods have not
yet found a clinical application.

Assessment of metabolizable energy
requirements and energy expenditure
For success in weight management, it is usually necessary to estimate the metabolizable energy requirement
to maintain body weight (a.k.a. maintenance energy
requirement [MER]). The most common method of determining MER is to use predictive equations, but such equations represent little more than an educated guess and,
even in healthy individuals, may miss actual requirement by 50%. Research methods for determining MER
include feeding experiments, while methods for determining energy expenditure (EE) (a proxy measure for
MER) include indirect calorimetry and tracer studies such
as double-labeled water. Arguably, indirect calorimetry is
most applicable to the clinic; it has been widely used in
human patients including for the determination of EE in
the morbidly obese. Indirect calorimetry can provide reliable measurements of EE in healthy dogs, trauma cases,
and cancer patients. However, this technique has not yet
found a clinical application for obesity management.
Portable indirect calorimeters have recently been developed for human patients and, once validated for dogs
and cats, might provide a useful tool to help in weight
management.

MANAGEMENT
In humans, the most successful approach to achieve
weight loss is through bariatric surgery, but this is not
likely to be either practical or ethically justifiable in
companion animals. Dietary therapy is the most widely
accepted method of weight management, although drug
therapy (using microsomal membrane transfer protein
[MTP] inhibitors) is also approved for the weight loss
phase in dogs but not cats. The weight loss phase can be
variable in length, but is typically 6–18 months and occasionally prolonged (i.e. over 2 years).
Weight management in cats and dogs involves two
stages: the weight loss phase whereby there is steady fat
mass loss, and weight maintenance, which involves stabilizing body weight and preventing rebound. The fundamental aims of weight management are to improve
quality of life and reduce associated disease risk. In so
doing, you aim to change the relationship between pet
and owner to one that promotes a healthy lifestyle. Thus,
the amount of weight loss that you recommend and the

K22463_C026.indd 1090

target weight can vary. Unless the habits of the owner
change for the long term, the management will fail, and
weight regain will occur.

Target weight, ideal weight, and tailoring the
individual plan
In setting a weight loss plan, it is essential to know the
ideal weight, since this will be used to set the initial
caloric intake (see below). The ideal weight is defined
as the weight at which fat mass is optimal for that animal. In reality, there will be a range of weights that are
deemed to be ideal, rather than a single weight (typically
body fat <20% for domestic cats and <35% for dogs). If a
historic weight measurement is available (e.g. an early
adult weight), where the animal was in optimal condition, that weight corresponds to the animal's ideal. If such
a weight is not available, an alternative approach is to
determine ideal weight from the current weight and BCS.
In this regard, each unit on the scale between 5/9 and 9/9
approximately corresponds to 10–15% of excess weight.
Therefore, with a simple calculation, the ideal weight can
be calculated (see Box 26.1).
Although often used interchangeably, the terms ­target
weight and ideal weight are not the same. The target
weight is defined as the weight that the clinician determines to be an appropriate end-point for weight loss. For
some animals, the target weight and ideal weight may
be equivalent, while for others target weight is greater.
The main benefits of aiming for ideal weight (as your
target) is that the greatest beneficial effects on disease
prevention and life span extension might be expected.
Such an approach would be most beneficial for young
animals with a long expected life span and free from concurrent disease. However, such benefits diminish in older
cats and dogs, where remaining life span is shorter and
concurrent diseases may already exist. Instead, weight
management should focus on improving quality of life,
and it may not be necessary to achieve ideal weight to
achieve this. In fact, a study in dogs has revealed that
reductions in severity of disease typically occur with
modest (i.e. >5%) reductions in weight. Therefore, aiming
for partial weight loss would be more realistic, quicker,
and, arguably, more appropriate in older animals, especially those with concurrent disease. In humans, an ‘obesity paradox’ has been identified. In this respect, being
overweight increases the risk of developing certain diseases, but once that disease develops, increased BMI can
improve survival. Examples of a similar obesity paradox
have also been seen in animals with chronic kidney disease and cardiac disease, with a recent study demonstrating longer survival times in overweight cats. In such

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Management of the obese dog or cat

cases, only a modest weight reduction (of 5–10%) would
be recommended, but aiming to maintain the patient
within its overweight range. Such a weight loss protocol will not lead to significant loss of lean tissue, but can
improve quality of life.

Expected rate of weight loss
The recommended rate of weight loss is ­controversial,
since initial recommendations of 1–2%/week were based
on obese dogs managed in a colony setting, and not
­client-owned dogs. While such rates can be achieved early
in the weight loss process (i.e. first 1–2 months), it becomes
increasingly difficult to maintain this over the long term.
Instead, an average rate of weight loss of 0.5–1.0%/week
is more realistic and appears to be safe. Overly rapid
rates of weight loss (>2%/week) are not recommended
since there is a potential to cause problems (e.g. excessive
lean tissue loss or hepatic lipidosis [cats only]). However,
in reality such rates are rare. Slower rates of weight loss
(<0.5%/week) might be acceptable, although the whole
process will likely take longer and might be a source of
owner frustration.

Dietary management
Diet formulation
Purpose-formulated weight loss diets are recommended
because energy content is reduced. This helps to promote
weight loss because rate is principally determined by
energy intake. Weight loss diets are also supplemented
with protein (amino acids) and micronutrients, relative
to their energy content, and this ensures that deficiency
states do not arise despite energy restriction. A recent
study has demonstrated that, despite often marked energy
restriction, nutrient deficiencies are not observed. While
supplementing protein, relative to energy content, does
not speed up the rate of weight loss, it ensures that lean
tissue loss is minimized, and also has beneficial effects
on satiety (see below). L-carnitine facilitates transport of
fatty acids in mitochondria, assisting their oxidation, and
supplementation in a weight loss diet also assists with
maintaining lean tissue mass during weight loss, while
supplementation of micronutrients, relative to energy
content, ensures that deficiency states do not arise.
Altering the macronutrient content of a weight
management diet can also improve satiety, and the
­
most common approach is to supplement fiber content.
However, in dogs, supplementing both protein and fiber
provides an additive benefit, and such diets improve the
outcome of weight loss by speeding up the overall rate,
increasing the likelihood of reaching target weight, and
preserving lean tissue. The situation is more complex for

K22463_C026.indd 1091

1091

cats, since protein content is a key determinant of voluntary food intake and incorporating more can increase
rather than decrease voluntary food intake. Furthermore,
incorporating too much fiber can make the diet unpalatable. Therefore, for cats, the greatest effect on satiety occurs when fiber and protein are both moderately,
rather than markedly, supplemented.

Energy intake during weight loss
There are various approaches to calculating the energy
intake required for controlled weight loss. Some clinicians
recommend first calculating resting energy requirements
for the current body weight (i.e. for dogs: 70 kcals × body
weight0.75/day), and then feeding 80% of this amount.
While this has the benefits of simplicity, it does not take
into account the degree of excess body weight and the
initial response may be more variable. Adjustments may
be required in the early weeks to determine the correct
energy intake for the individual case.
The author prefers an approach whereby energy
intake is, instead, based on ideal body weight and not
the current weight. Arguably, this approach enables the
clinician to produce a more precise starting point for the
energy intake required for weight loss because the magnitude of excess weight is better factored in. Ideal weight
can be estimated in various ways (see above). Exact recommendations on energy intake are then varied depending on the species, gender, neuter status, and presence
of ­
co-existing (especially orthopedic) disease. In dogs,
a recent study suggested that a typical starting allocation for weight loss should be approximately 60 kcal/kg
metabolic body weight (MBW) at target weight0.75, with
­neutered dogs requiring less energy than entire dogs
and female dogs less than male dogs. However, while this
initial allocation might be sufficient during the first few
weeks of the weight loss program, energy intake often
needs subsequently to be modified, as and when weight
loss slows. Typically, small adjustments (of up to 5%)
are made on each occasion. Indeed, in the canine study
described above, mean energy intake over the entire
weight loss period was 57 kcal/kg MBW at target weight.
Calculating energy intake for weight loss is simpler in
cats, where a linear equation is suitable. In one study, an
average starting allocation of 40 kcal/kg target weight
was successful in most cats, with mean energy intake
over the whole of weight loss being 32 kcal/kg. With this
degree of restriction, the mean rate of weight loss is 0.8%
body weight/week.
Whatever the method of determining food intake,
precision in portioning is absolutely critical in order to
ensure success. Use of measuring cups should be avoided

23/04/16 1:29 pm

1092

Elements of therapy

since portion sizes are imprecise and variable (usually
being overestimated). Instead, electronic kitchen scales
to weigh out food portions are strongly recommended.
If at all possible, owners should not give any additional
food (e.g. table scraps or treats) and care should be taken
to prevent the patient from scavenging. If desired, food
can be given in two, or more, meals per day, preferably
providing more food at times when the owner is with the
pet (since this is when begging is most likely to occur).
However, use of an interactive feeding device is preferred
(e.g. puzzle feeding toy or modified feeding bowl). These
devices have the effect of slowing food intake, thereby
improving satiety.
Occasional treats may be sanctioned (preferably some
of the weight management food or a dog treat of known
caloric content [e.g. dental treat]), but it is essential to take
them into account so that they are included in the overall
allocation and provide <5% of total daily requirements.

Lifestyle management

Pharmaceutical therapy and weight loss

Regular weight checks should be scheduled during weight
loss. At the start of the program, it is best to book reweigh
sessions at 2-week intervals, since this is the time when
the owner is becoming accustomed to dramatic changes
in lifestyle, and adjustments to the plan may be required
if weight loss is progressing too quickly or too slowly.
Thereafter, in patients where weight loss is progressing
steadily, the interval between checks can be increased,
but should not, ideally, exceed 4 weeks. More frequent
checks may be needed in cases where weight loss is slow
or stalls regularly. It is usually best if a dedicated member
of staff takes charge of weight management. That way,
they can get to know the client, and build up a trusting
relationship, improving the likelihood of success. Given
that some clients require intensive support throughout the program, it is advisable for staff to be trained in
owner counseling.
Once the target weight is reached, food intake is
increased gradually (typically in increments of up to
5%), until body weight stabilizes. Thereafter, weight
checks should continue but the frequency can be gradually decreased. It is essential to continue to monitor body
weight after ideal weight has been achieved to ensure
that weight that was lost is not regained. Weight regain is
a recognized phenomenon in humans who diet, although
the reasons are still unclear. The most likely explanation is that when obese humans are returned to a lean
state, their resting metabolic rate slows. Studies in dogs
have also demonstrated a tendency for weight regain,
although it affects fewer patients and rarely do dogs
regain all the weight lost. Other studies have demonstrated that, as in humans, the MER is less after weight
loss. In a recent study examining follow-up after

Two drugs have been licensed for use in dogs (but NOT
cats): mitratapide and dirlotapide. Although they have
now been available for a number of years, and there is
reasonable evidence of efficacy, they have not been used
widely in a clinical setting. Both of these drugs are MTP
inhibitors and have a local effect on the intestinal epithelial cell, blocking the assembly and release of lipoprotein particles into the bloodstream. Dietary caloric intake
is decreased both by decreasing lipid absorption and
by decreasing appetite (the latter thought to be due to
release of a satiety signal that acts centrally on the appetite center). The efficacy of these drugs declines if they are
administered in conjunction with a low-fat (<10%) diet.
In Europe, both mitratapide and dirlotapide are licensed,
but only dirlotapide is licensed in North America.
Mitratapide is only licensed for short-term use (i.e.
8 weeks) and was designed to kick-start a conventional
weight loss program. In contrast, dirlotapide is licensed
for continuous use for up to 12 months, which is sufficient for many, but not all, weight loss programs. Weight
loss occurs at a steady rate (0.75%/week on average),
but periodic increases in dose are required to maintain
weight loss.
The most common side-effects are vomiting and diarrhea, and these are observed in up to 20% of patients.
If owners are forewarned that it may occur, then it is
usually better tolerated. Anorexia can also occur. While
these drugs can be successful in promoting weight loss,
appetite returns rapidly when they are discontinued and
so other strategies (feeding and behavioral) must also
implemented to be successful. Without this, a rapid and
predictable rebound occurs.

K22463_C026.indd 1092

Increasing physical activity is also recommended for most
affected animals since it can assist in lean tissue preservation and, possibly, help to prevent the rapid regain in
weight that can occur after a period of successful weight
loss. It is also rewarding for owners since it represents an
alternative to giving food-based rewards. Suitable exercise strategies in dogs include lead walking, swimming,
hydrotherapy, and treadmills. Cats can be encouraged
to increase their activity through regular play sessions
with cat toys (e.g. fishing rod toys), motorized units, and
puzzle feeders (see above). Ideally, daily exercise should
be taken and, for dogs, 30 minutes or more is preferred.
For cats, short periods of play activity are used, typically
1–2 ­minutes at a time two or more times per day. The
exercise program should be tailored to the individual,
and take account of any concurrent medical concerns.

Monitoring weight loss

23/04/16 1:29 pm

Management of the obese dog or cat

successful weight loss, almost half of the dogs regained
weight. Critically, when the diet was switched from the
purpose-formulated weight management diet to a different diet (typically a standard maintenance diet), dogs
were 20 times more likely to regain weight. Thus, owners should be strongly recommended to continue to feed
the weight management diet, albeit to maintain weight
rather than achieve further weight loss. In a similar study
in cats, weight regain was again identified, and the problem was of a similar magnitude to dogs. However, the
most notable factor associated with weight regain was
age, with younger cats (<9 years of age) more likely to
rebound.

PROGNOSIS
When an animal is predisposed to obesity, both through
individual and environmental factors, many of these
predispositions will remain after weight loss. Further,
the post-weight loss MER is significantly less than it was
prior to weight loss. For these reasons, obesity can only
be managed and never cured, and the prognosis for longterm success is guarded. In the author's experience, most
(80–90%) cats and dogs lose at least 10% of weight on a
program, with approximately two-thirds reaching their
target weight. Recent work by the author has identified
that initial body fat mass is negatively associated with
the likelihood of reaching the target weight. Furthermore,
dogs fed a dry weight management diet were more likely
to succeed than those fed either wet food or a combination of wet and dry food. The remaining dogs and cats
fail to lose significant weight, and are commonly lost to
follow-up. Owners of these animals often decide not to
return to the clinic and become noncontactable. Thus, the
exact reasons for discontinuing the program are difficult
to determine.

PREVENTION
Given the variable outcome of weight management diets,
prevention of obesity is likely to have a more significant
beneficial effect on the health and welfare of all dogs and
cats, rather than by treating once the problem has developed. Advice on correct nutrition and exercise should be
included in all puppy and kitten consultations and continued throughout the life of the animal. Body weight
and BCS should be assessed at every consultation and
also during the annual health check. Regularly monitoring body weight and BCS throughout life can enable subtle changes (e.g. ±5%) to be identified and rectified before

K22463_C026.indd 1093

1093

the problem worsens. Veterinarians should also be alert
to the weight gain that can occur as a consequence of neutering. It is advisable to schedule 2–3 checks for weight
and BCS in the first 6–12 months after neutering to identify those patients that gain excessive amounts of weight
at this time.
Finally, knowledge of pet ownership styles could ultimately be used to help in obesity prevention. If certain
ownership styles were known to predispose to weight
gain and obesity, then targeted owner education could
be applied to owners with such styles. A recent study
has identified that different populations of cat exist
that respond differently to long-term ad-libitum feeding.
Some cats are unable to regulate their food intake, leading to gradual lifelong weight gain, while others maintain stable weight and optimal body condition lifelong,
presumably by regulating intake. Therefore, this work
suggests that different groups of cats have different
feeding styles; some are regulators, while others tend to
overeat. When it comes to preventing weight gain, attention should be paid to matching pet ownership style to
feeding style. For example, an owner with an indulgent
feeding style would be a bad match for a cat that overeats, but is likely to be fine if they were to own a cat that
self-regulates intake.

RECOMMENDED FURTHER READING
German AJ (2006) The growing problem of obesity in dogs and
cats. J Nutr 136:1940S–1946S.
German AJ, Holden SL, Morris PJ et al. (2012) Long-term
­follow-up after weight management in obese dogs: the
role of diet in preventing regain. Vet J 192:65–70.
German AJ, Holden SL, Wiseman-Orr ML et al. (2012) Quality of
life is reduced in obese dogs but improves after successful
weight loss. Vet J 192:428–434.
German AJ, Ryan VH, German AC et al. (2010) Obesity, its
­associated disorders and the role of inflammatory
­adipokines in companion animals. Vet J 185:4–9.
Kealy RD, Lawler DF, Ballam JM et al. (2002) Effects of diet
restriction on life span and age-related changes in dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1315–1320.
Kopelman PG (2000) Obesity as a medical problem. Nature
404:635–643.
Lund EM, Armstrong PJ, Kirk CA et al. (2005) Prevalence and risk
factors for obesity in adult cats from private US veterinary
practices. Int J Appl Res Vet M 3:88–96.
Lund EM, Armstrong PJ, Kirk CA et al. (2006) Prevalence and risk
factors for obesity in adult dogs from private US veterinary
practices. Int J Appl Res Vet M 4:177–186.
Trayhurn P, Wood IS (2004) Adipokines: inflammation and
the pleiotropic role of white adipose tissue. Brit J Nutr
92:347–355.

23/04/16 1:29 pm

This page intentionally left blank

1095

Appendix: Clinical cases

CASE 1: HEPATITIS – ROBERT ARMENTANO
Signalment/history

widespread portal lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate. Copper
stains are negative, aerobic and ­anaerobic cultures are
negative.

A 6-year-old neutered male Cocker Spaniel presents for
a 1-week history of acute onset of polyuria, polydipsia,
mild inappetence, lethargy, and intermittent vomiting.

Histopathologic diagnosis

Clinical examination and initial diagnostics

Treatment recommendations

The dog is quiet, alert, and responsive. Physical examination is unremarkable apart from icteric sclera, skin, and
mucous membranes. Body condition score is 2/5. The dog
resides in a wooded area in the Midwest USA with access
to standing water. There is one other dog in the household
who is clinically normal.
Minimum database tests. Serum chemistry: ALP =
1,263 U/L (reference interval [RI], 5–160); ALT = 2,562 U/L
(RI, 18–121); AST = 755 U/L (RI, 16–55); total bilirubin =
4.5 mg/dl (RI, 0.0–0.3). Urinalysis: urine SG 1.012; 3+
­bilirubinuria. Other serum chemistry, CBC, and urinalysis
values are unremarkable.

Chronic active hepatitis is an inflammatory hepatopathy of unknown etiology. If primary causes such as
­drug-induced, bacterial, and copper-associated hepatopathy are excluded, then the diagnosis is consistent with
an idiopathic, autoimmune condition. Common breeds
predisposed to this disease include the Dobermann,
Cocker Spaniel, and Labrador Retriever, but it can occur
in any breed. The mainstay therapy includes glucocorticoids with other immunosuppressive medications such
as azathioprine, if indicated. Additional therapy includes
antioxidant medications such as S-adenosylmethionine,
silybin, and vitamin E as well as a low-protein diet.
Monitoring and treating for portal hypertension (ascites),

Differential diagnosis

Chronic active hepatitis.

Common differential diagnoses in a middle aged dog
with a severe hepatopathy include toxicity, drug-induced
hepatitis, bacterial hepatitis (including leptospirosis),
­
obstructive biliary disease, autoimmune/inflammatory
hepatitis (chronic active hepatitis), copper-associated
hepatitis, and neoplasia.

1.1

Recommended diagnostic testing
Abdominal radiographs, abdominal ultrasound, leptospirosis serology, urine PCR, liver biopsy.

Test results
Abdominal radiographs show mild microhepatica,
­abdominal ultrasound is unremarkable, and ­leptospirosis
serology is negative (serologic titers <50, urine PCR
­negative). Laparoscopy reveals a diffusely mottled liver
(Figure 1.1). Liver histopathology shows a moderate,

K22463_Appendix.indd 1095

Figure 1.1 Moderately, diffusely mottled liver with normal
appearing gallbladder.

26/04/16 4:47 pm

1096

Appendix Clinical cases

2.1

as well as hepatic encephalopathy are crucial in managing
patients with progressive disease leading to fibrosis and
end-stage cirrhosis.

Conclusions
Chronic hepatopathies can present with acute signs
requiring a thorough diagnostic work up. Early diagnosis is invaluable as the liver can regenerate if treatment
is implemented. The prognosis for cirrhosis is considered
guarded to poor.

CASE 2: BLASTOMYCOSIS – ROBERT
ARMENTANO
Signalment/history
An 8-year-old neutered male Labrador Retriever presents for a 1-week history of a nonproductive cough, hyporexia, and lethargy, and a 24-hour history of hemoptysis.

2.2

Clinical examination and initial diagnostics
The dog is quiet, depressed, and responsive. Temperature
is 104.8°F (40.4°C), heart rate is 120 bpm, and respiratory
rate is 60 breaths per minute. On physical examination
there are increased bronchovesicular lung sounds in all
lung fields, with no crackles or wheezing. The remainder of the physical examination is unremarkable. The
mucous membranes are pink with a CRT <2 seconds. Body
condition score is 2.5/5. The dog resides in a wooded area
in Wisconsin, USA.
Minimum database tests. CBC: neutrophilia of 16.5 k/µl
(RI, 2.95–11.64); PCV = 38.7% (RI, 37.3–61.7); platelet
count = 205 k/µl (RI, 148–484). Coagulation profile:
prothrombin time = 12 seconds (RI, 12–17), partial
­­
­thromboplastin time = 80 seconds (RI, 70–102). Serum
chemistry profile was unremarkable, as was urinalysis.
Pulse oximetry: SpO2 = 95% (RI, 95–100). Urine SG = 1.030
with an ­
inactive sediment. Thoracic radiographs are
shown (Figures 2.1, 2.2).

Differential diagnoses
Common differential diagnoses in a middle aged dog
with a diffuse miliary to nodular lung pattern include
neoplasia (primary versus metastatic), fungal pneumonia (blastomycosis or other disseminated fungal disease),
and pneumonia (bacterial).

Recommended diagnostic testing
Abdominal radiographs, abdominal ultrasound, urine
blastomycosis antigen testing, lung fine-needle aspirate
with cytology or biopsy.

K22463_Appendix.indd 1096

Figures 2.1, 2.2 Lateral and ventrodorsal thoracic radiographs
demonstrating a diffuse military to nodular lung pattern.

Test results
Abdominal radiographs and ultrasound examinations
were normal. The urine blastomycosis antigen test had an
antigen titer of 11.61 ng/ml (RI, 0.2–14.7). Lung cytology
via an ultrasound guided lung nodule fine needle aspirate is shown (Figure 2.3).

26/04/16 4:47 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

2.3

Figure 2.3 Blastomyces dermatitidis spore (arrow) obtained by
fine needle aspiration and cytology. Diff-Quik®, ×100.

Treatment
The preferred medication is with a triazole antifungal
agent, with itraconazole recommended as the best initial medication. Fluconazole has also been shown to be
effective.

Conclusions
Canine blastomycosis most commonly presents as a respiratory disorder with the main clinical signs including
increased respiratory rate and coughing. Blastomycosis
can involve any organ system, including the eye, bone,
and skin. The most common thoracic radiographic lesion
is a diffuse interstitial to nodular pattern; however, in
up to 50% of cases the lung pattern can include a nondiffuse infiltrate, alveolar pattern, or thoracic mass. The
most effective diagnostic test for blastomycosis is either
cytology evaluation or urine antigen testing, while histopathology and culture are also acceptable. Sensitivity
for urine antigen testing ranges from 93.5% to 100%, thus
serving as an excellent screening test. This test is also
effective in monitoring remission of disease.
The prognosis for systemic blastomycosis is favorable
(about 20% overall mortality) with multiple months of
treatment. Reported negative prognostic factors include:
severity of lung disease, oxygen dependency, as well as
central nervous system and/or ocular involvement.

1097

Clinical examination
The dog was bright, alert, responsive, and hydrated.
Heart and lungs auscultated within normal limits.
Preanesthetic laboratory work was unremarkable.
Conscious oral examination revealed missing right (105)
and left (205) m
­ axillary first premolars, left mandibular
canine (304) and first premolar (305), right mandibular
first incisor (401), and a partially erupted right mandibular canine (404) (Figure 3.1). During anesthetized
examination and probing, the left maxillary second
­
molar (210) and the right and left third molars (311, 411)
were also discovered to be missing. In addition, the right
maxillary second incisor (102) was mobile and discolored,
the left mandibular incisors (301–303) were mobile, and
the remaining right mandibular incisors (402, 403) were
crowded. Scant or mild tartar was noted throughout the
mouth. The left mandibular first molar (309) was partially erupted and a 4 mm periodontal pocket was probed
at this tooth.

Differential diagnosis
Missing tooth: congenitally missing permanent tooth;
previously extracted tooth; fracture below the gingiva;
impacted tooth. Partially erupted teeth: congenital,
developmental.

Provisional diagnosis
Impacted tooth with possible dentigerous cyst formation;
partially erupted permanent mandibular canines.

Diagnostic testing
Intraoral radiographs of the entire mouth were obtained.
The left mandibular canine and first premolar teeth were
impacted and an associated dentigerous cyst was seen
3.1

CASE 3: IMPACTED TOOTH – ERIN P. RIBKA &
BROOK A. NIEMIEC
Signalment/history
A 7-year-old spayed female Maltese was referred for
evaluation of missing teeth noted during routine dental
­prophylaxis approximately 3 months earlier.

K22463_Appendix.indd 1097

Figure 3.1 Photograph of the rostral left mandible. The left
mandibular canine (304) and first premolar (305) are missing.

26/04/16 4:47 pm

1098

Appendix Clinical cases

3.3

3.2

Figure 3.3 Intraoperative photograph showing the impacted
left mandibular canine (304) and first premolar (305).

Conclusion
Impacted teeth are frequently diagnosed, particularly in
small breed and brachycephalic dogs, and should always
be radiographed. Dentigerous cysts are fairly common
sequelae of impacted teeth and, if left untreated, can lead
to serious consequences such as pathologic jaw fracture.
Partially erupted teeth can lead to development of periodontal disease and should be treated with appropriate
periodontal surgical techniques.
Figure 3.2 Radiograph of the rostral mandibles. Note the
minimal amount of bone adjacent to the impacted left
canine (304) compared with the right (404).

radiographically. (Figure 3.2). Intraoral dental radiographs
are a necessity for proper diagnosis of ‘missing’ teeth.

Treatment
Full dental prophylaxis (i.e. scaling and polishing) was
­performed. A gingival incision was made over the area
of the missing canine and premolar teeth and the tissue
gently elevated from the bone with periosteal elevators to
create a large envelope flap. Bone was carefully removed
using a 701 cross-cut taper fissure bur on a high-speed
air driven hand-piece to expose the impacted teeth.
Gentle luxation and elevation were performed to ease
the teeth out of the mandible so as not to damage vital
structures or fracture the jaw (Figure 3.3). The partially
erupted right mandibular canine was treated with an apical ­repositioning flap to expose the enamel, lengthen the
crown of the tooth, and prevent future periodontal pocketing. The left mandibular first molar was treated with closed
root planing and a ­perioceutic to prevent further progression of p
­ eriodontal disease. All of the mandibular incisors
were removed as well as the right maxillary second incisor, which was found to have an unstable root fracture on
radiography.

K22463_Appendix.indd 1098

CASE 4: TOOTH RESORPTION – ERIN
P. RIBKA & BROOK A. NIEMIEC
Signalment/history
An 11-year-old spayed female Chesapeake Bay Retriever
was presented for extraction of a left maxillary
4th ­premolar (208).

Clinical examination
The patient had a reputation for being snappish and the
referring veterinarian advised that previous examinations had to be performed under mild sedation. The dog
was bright, alert, responsive, and hydrated on presentation. A severe tooth resorption lesion of 208 was obvious
on careful conscious examination (Figure 4.1). An uncomplicated crown fracture of 108 was also noted. No abnormalities were noted on auscultation of heart and lungs
and preanesthetic CBC, chemistry panel, and thoracic
radiographs performed by the referring veterinarian
were unremarkable.
Anesthetized oral examination revealed gingivitis
and widespread early periodontal disease evidenced
by p
­ ockets 4–6 mm deep in many teeth. Uncomplicated
crown fractures were confirmed in the right maxillary
fourth premolar (108) and also in the left mandibular

26/04/16 4:47 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

1099

4.1

4.2

Figure 4.1 Photograph of left maxillary 4th premolar (208) with
gingival overgrowth.

Figure 4.2 Same tooth as shown in Figure 4.1 after the removal
of the excess gingiva and creation and elevation of an envelope
flap, revealing a large tooth resorption of the buccal surface
of 208.

second premolar (306) and right mandibular third incisor
(403). Abrasive wear was noted on the occlusal surfaces of
all molar teeth. The tooth resorption of the left maxillary
fourth premolar (208) was seen to be extensive, invading
well into the pulp chamber (Figure 4.2).

4.3

Differential diagnosis
Tooth resorption, complicated crown fracture, periodontal disease, neoplasia.

Provisional diagnosis
Tooth resorption.

Diagnostic testing
Intraoral dental radiographs were obtained of the
affected tooth (Figure 4.3).

Treatment
Full dental prophylaxis was performed. An envelope flap
was made by sharp incision of the interdental gingiva
and buccal gingival attachment of the affected tooth.
The flap was gently elevated with a periosteal elevator to
expose the buccal alveolar bone and furcation of the tooth.
A cross-cut taper fissure bur (#701L) on a high-speed,
water-cooled dental hand-piece was used to section all
three tooth roots, from the furcation to the coronal aspect
of the crown. Buccal alveolar bone was carefully removed
(using the same bur) to better visualize and elevate the
roots. The roots were carefully and gently ­
luxated to
fatigue the periodontal ligament, elevated from the bone,
and extracted completely. The remaining edges of bone
were smoothed with a coarse diamond bur and the sockets were curetted gently to remove debris, granuloma

K22463_Appendix.indd 1099

Figure 4.3 Dental radiograph of the same tooth. Note the
obvious radiolucency of the affected crown.

tissue, and any small fragments of bone or root. The flap
was closed without tension using 4-0 poliglecaprone 25
on a reverse cutting needle in a simple interrupted pattern. Complete extraction of all roots and fragments was
confirmed with dental radiographs.

Conclusion
Although generally considered to be a feline disease,
tooth resorptions can and do occur in dogs as well. These
very painful lesions should be dealt with definitively as
early as possible to minimize discomfort and possible
behavioral changes (as seen in this case). At the 2-week
recheck, the patient was visibly more comfortable and
her owner was very pleased with the improvement in

26/04/16 4:47 pm

1100

Appendix Clinical cases

her demeanor and greater energy and activity level
after tooth extraction. Dental radiography is essential to
properly diagnose and plan treatment and to ensure that
extraction is complete.

CASE 5: PULMONARY FIBROSIS – CÉCILE
CLERCX & ELODIE ROELS
Signalment/history

Table 5.1 Blood parameters: hematology and biochemistry.
(Abnormal values in bold.)

Day 1

After 6
months

Units

Reference
interval

Hematocrit

53

60

%

37–55

Hematology

An 11-year-old West Highland White Terrier (WHWT)
presented with chronic cough, progressive exercise intolerance, and tachypnea. Previous treatment with steroids
improved the cough, but the treatment induced polyphagia, polydipisa, and weight gain.

White blood
cells

29.0

13.47

109/l

6.0–15.0

Neutrophils

27.9

10.53

109/l

3.0–11.4

Platelets

675

378

109/l

200–500

Clinical examination

Total proteins

73

71

g/l

52–62

Albumin

38.04

g/l

27–32

BUN

6.8

15

mmol/l

1.66–18.21

Creatinine

76.16

55.69

µmol/l

<133

Sodium

152

147

mmol/l

140–155

Potassium

5.6

5.3

mmol/l

3.6–5.6

Differential diagnosis

ALT

39.30

25.00

U/L

5–62

Causes of chronic cough, exercise intolerance, tachypnea,
and syncope include lower airway disease (pulmonary
fibrosis, chronic bronchitis, tracheobronchial collapse,
neoplastic pulmonary disease), cardiac disease, thromboembolic disease, or a combination of diseases.

ALP

834

243

U/L

27–74

Bilirubin

2.68

µmol/l

1–6

Cholesterol

10.69

mmol/l

<7.8

Provisional diagnosis

lavage fluid analysis was unremarkable. Fecal analysis
(Baerman) failed to reveal any parasites.
Therefore, primary canine idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis (CIPF) was suspected, with secondary tracheal
collapse, bronchomalacia, and pulmonary arterial
hypertension. High-resolution tomography of the thorax was proposed in order to raise the index of suspicion
and revealed lesions compatible with CIPF (Figure 5.3).
Although histopathology of lung tissue is considered as
the gold standard to confirm diagnosis, it was not performed ante mortem in the present case.

Body condition score was 8/9. A severe restrictive dyspnea
was noted, with increased respiratory rate and increased
expiratory effort. Ausultation revealed diffuse inspiratory
crackles, easily audible in both lung fields, but no heart
murmur. Mucous membranes were congested. Clinical
examination failed to reveal any other abnormality. The
abdomen was distended and hepatomegaly was palpated.

Since the dog is a WHWT, and since cardiac auscultation
failed to reveal any murmur, the crackles were thought to
be due to pulmonary fibrosis. Cushing’s disease was suspected but was possibly iatrogenic.
Blood work (Table 5.1) revealed thrombocytosis, neutrophilic leukocytosis, and elevated alkaline phosphatase
and cholesterol, possibly related to steroid administration. Thoracic radiographs (Figures 5.1a, b) showed
generalized interstitial pattern, right cardiomegaly, and
a redundant tracheal membrane. Echocardiography
confirmed the absence of a primary cardiac disease.
Doppler-echocardiographic evidence of mild pulmonary
hypertension (PH) was noted, with systolic pressure gradient estimated at 37 mmHg (RI, <31.4 mmHg). Blood
gas analysis revealed severe hypoxemia (64 mmHg, RI,
85–100) and elevated Aa gradient (23 mmHg, RI, <15).
Bronchoscopy showed a grade 1 tracheal collapse and
severe bronchomalacia (Figure 5.2). Bronchoalveolar

K22463_Appendix.indd 1100

Biochemistry

Treatment, prognosis, follow up
To date, and despite a huge amount of investigation
in this field, no treatment is able to cure pulmonary
fibrosis, either in humans or in dogs. Acetylcysteine
­
seems to slow down the progression of fibrosis in human
PH without s­ ignificant side-effects, presumably through
an a
­ ntioxidant activity, therefore it was prescribed for

26/04/16 4:47 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

1101

5.1

5.3

a

Figure 5.3 Transverse thoracic pre-contrast high-resolution
CT image (lung window) at the level of the caudal lung lobes.
Scan reveals a generalized ground-glass opacity in a patchy
distribution, resulting in a mosaic attenuation pattern,
in addition to parenchymal bands and bronchovascular
thickening.

b
Figures 5.1a. b Thoracic radiographs (right lateral and
dorsoventral views) showing generalized interstitial pattern,
right cardiomegaly, and a redundant tracheal membrane.
5.2

this dog (15 mg/kg q12h). In order to manage the cough,
at least partly related to chronic bronchitis and tracheal
collapse, oral steroid therapy was progressively replaced
by inhaled therapy with fluticasone. Theophylline (10
mg/kg q12h) was added, with the hope of improving
ventilation. Sildenafil (1 mg/kg q12h) was prescribed to
manage the pulmonary arterial hypertension. Last but
not least, since obesity has a negative impact on ventilation performance, a diet was advised to reduce the body
weight.
Treatment improved the quality of life of the patient,
despite the persistence of some cough and exercise intolerance. Six-minutes-walking distance increased and
CT and echocardiographic findings were stable up to
9 months after diagnosis.

CASE 6: RESPIRATORY WORMS – CÉCILE
CLERCX
Signalment/history

Figure 5.2 Bronchoscopic examination showing
bronchomalacia.

K22463_Appendix.indd 1101

A 5-month-old male Pomeranian weighing 1.7 kg,
recently acquired and originating from an eastern
European country, was presented with cough, exercise
intolerance, and tachypnea of 2 weeks’ duration. The
dog was presumed to be up-to-date with his vaccination.

26/04/16 4:47 pm

1102

Appendix Clinical cases

Previous treatment with antibiotics had not helped
resolve the signs.

Clinical examination
Body condition score was 5/9. Rectal temperature was
normal. The dog was alert. A slight expiratory effort was
noted, with increased respiratory rate (80 breaths per
minute). Auscultation revealed increased lung sounds but
no crackles and no heart murmur. No other abnormality
was revealed.

Differential considerations
Lower airway disease of infectious origin was suspected.
Since the dog was young, originated from an eastern
European country (poor transport conditions, poor vaccination, and parasite control), was in good general

condition, and failed to respond to antibiotics, the most
likely ­
differentials included parasites (e.g. enteric
worms or lung worms [Crenosoma vulpis, Filaroides osleri,
Angiostrongylus vasorum]), toxoplasmosis, kennel cough
(mainly Bordetella bronchiseptica), and infection with
mycoplasmas or Pneumocystis carinii. Distemper was less
likely in the absence of systemic signs and immune deficiency can always occur.

Diagnosis
Blood work revealed moderate neutrophilic leukocytosis
with a moderate left shift. Thoracic radiographs (Figures
6.1a–c) showed a generalized bronchointerstitial pattern
and an alveolar pattern in peripheral areas of both left
and right caudal lung lobes, as well as ventrally in the left
cranial and right middle lung lobes. These ­findings were

6.1

a

c

K22463_Appendix.indd 1102

b

Figures 6.1a–c Left lateral (a), right lateral (b), and
ventrodorsal (c) thoracic radiographs.

26/04/16 4:47 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

6.2

1103

the skin and body wall dorsally. The remainder of the
­physical examination is unremarkable.

Differential diagnoses
Trauma to the trachea, body wall, or mediastinum; tracheal injury secondary to neoplasia or infection.

Provisional diagnosis
Figure 6.2 Baermann analysis of feces showing a larva of
Crenosoma vulpis.

compatible with an atypical bronchopneumonia (A. vasorum) embolism.
Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid was used for RT-PCR
assessment of organisms. Moderate levels of A. ­vasorum
were detected, while B. bronchiseptica, distemper,
Mycoplasma cynos and M. cani were negative. Fecal analysis revealed the presence of Uncinaria and Toxocara canis
(floatation) and Crenosoma vulpis (Baermann, Figure 6.2).
Therefore, parasitic tracheobronchopneumonia (mainly
due to A. vasorum or C. vulpis, or possibly to Uncinaria,
T. canis and Toxoplasma) was diagnosed.

Treatment
The dog was treated with fenbendazole (50 mg/kg PO q24h
for 20 days) and amoxicilline + clavulanic acid (20 mg/kg
q12h for 8 days) as well as clindamycin (12.5 mg/kg PO
q12h for 2 weeks) against potential toxoplasmosis. The
condition of the dog worsened after 48 hours, the cough
increased and a severe dyspnea appeared, supected to
be due to massive destruction of respiratory parasites.
Prednisolone (0.4 mg/kg PO q12h for 3 days then 0.5 mg/kg
q24h for 2 days, then 0.5 mg/kg every other day) was
added; the dog quickly improved, was discharged, and
had no more clinical signs.

CASE 7: TRACHEAL TEAR – JESSICA BULLOCK

The most likely diagnosis is tracheal injury secondary
to recent endotracheal intubation based on the recent
clinical history and normal status prior to the dental procedure. However, given the patient’s signalment, other
possible causes for tracheal injury should be ruled out.

Emergency treatment
The patient was allowed to rest quietly in oxygen
at 40% and sedatives were administered as needed.
Acepromazine (0.01–0.04 mg/kg IV q4–6h) and butorphanol (0.1–0.3 mg/kg IV q4–6h) are commonly recommended
in such situations to help decrease respiratory anxiety.
Acepromazine can induce hypotension and is contraindicated in hypotensive patients.

Diagnostic testing
●● Blood gas analysis showed a mild respiratory alkalosis with normal serum electrolytes; this is expected
with the increased respiratory rate and excess loss of
CO2. The patient had a mild azotemia and a urine SG
from a free-catch sample was 1.040; mild dehydration
with prerenal azotemia was presumed.
●● Blood pressure was slightly elevated at 150 mmHg
and assumed to be caused by increased anxiety.
●● Thoracic radiographs (taken after mild sedation)
showed severe subcutaneous emphysema, moderate
pneumomediastinum, mild pneumothorax, and mild
pneumoretroperitoneum. There was no evidence of
neoplasia or other type of lung pathology (Figure 7.1).

Signalment/history

Recommended procedures

A 10-year-old spayed female Chihuahua is examined for
evaluation of a 10-day history of progressive cough and
a 5-day history of progressive subcutaneous emphysema.
The history revealed normal blood work prior to a dental
cleaning performed 10 days ago at another clinic.

Although the large majority of tracheal injuries can
be managed medically with rest, time, and medications, this patient’s condition was deteriorating rather
than improving. Due to the severity of the patient’s
­symptoms and the progressive nature of the signs, tracheoscopy was performed for a more detailed evaluation
of the trachea. This study showed that nine tracheal rings
were linearly ruptured in a 3-cm stretch – the esophagus
had fortuitously partially occluded the tear. The rent was
­surgically repaired, and the dog recovered and convalesced uneventfully.

Clinical examination
The dog is bright, alert, anxious, and breathing, with
moderately increased respiratory rate and effort. There
is marked subcutaneous emphysema extending from the
carpi to the tarsi with 2–3 cm of emphysema between

K22463_Appendix.indd 1103

26/04/16 4:47 pm

1104

Appendix Clinical cases

7.1

Provisional diagnosis
The provisional diagnosis is AKI due to toxin ingestion or
chronic kidney disease (fibrosis or pyelonephritis) based
on normal abdominal palpation and lack of observed
lower urinary tract signs.

Additional diagnostic testing
●● Ethylene glycol screening tests (serum testing and

Figure 7.1 A ventrodorsal thoracic radiograph showing marked
subcutaneous emphysema associated with a tracheal tear.

CASE 8: KIDNEY DISEASE – JESSICA BULLOCK
Signalment/history
A 7-year-old neutered male Domestic Shorthair cat is
examined for a 2–3-day history of lethargy and decreased
appetite. The patient is a historically healthy outdoor cat,
and all vaccinations are current.

urine sediment examination) are recommended
as intoxication with ethylene glycol at the stage of
marked azotemia is uniformly fatal unless immediate dialysis is possible – it then still carries a grave
prognosis. Urine sediment examination was unremarkable in this cat.
●● Urine culture to rule out urinary tract infection (UTI).
Although a simple UTI is both statistically unlikely
and unlikely to cause these symptoms, it could contribute as a co-morbidity and is less likely to be identified on screening tests due to the low urine SG. Urine
culture was negative in this cat.
●● Abdominal ultrasound is an excellent ­
screening
modality to help characterize renal changes, specifically looking for evidence of neoplasia ­(confirmed
with fine-needle aspirates or biopsies), pyelectasia (potentially indicative of pyelonephritis
or o
­bstruction, confirmed with cultures), and/or
hydronephrosis (indicative of current or previous
­
obstruction, ­
confirmed as needed with contrast
studies). In this case, abdominal ultrasound was
unremarkable.

Initial treatment

The cat is quiet, alert, responsive, and approximately
7% dehydrated. There are no other significant findings.
A hemogram was normal. Serum chemistry abnormalities: BUN = 310 mg/dl (RI, 16–36); creatinine = 20 mg/dl
(RI, 0.8–2.4); phosphorus = 20 mg/dl (RI, 3.1–6.0); potassium = 6.0 mEq/l (RI, 3.5–5.8). Urine SG = 1.012.

This cat was treated with 100 ml/kg/day of lactated
Ringer’s solution IV, ampicillin/sulbactam (30 mg/kg IV
q8h), antinausea medication (maropitant 1 mg/kg SC
q24), and a gastroprotectant (famotidine 1 mg/kg q24h).
After 3 days of treatment, the kidney values had only
mildly improved to a BUN 196 mg/dl and a creatinine of
14.9 mg/dl. The cat had gained 0.5 kg body weight, respiratory rate was increasing, and he was still inappetent
and lethargic.

Differential diagnosis

Other recommended procedures

Acute kidney injury (AKI) due to toxin ingestion (ethylene
glycol, lily, various human medications, others); infection
(leptospirosis, ascending bacterial infection); neoplasia
(lymphoma, although there was no renomegaly); urinary
obstruction (urethral, ureteral, combination); acute exacerbation of underlying chronic kidney disease.

Dialysis is recommended in cases of severe azotemia
that become unresponsive to traditional medical management and in certain cases of known acute intoxications. At this author’s institution, approximately 50% of
the acute kidney injury patients treated with dialysis
leave the hospital improved after 2–3 weeks of treatment.

Physical examination

K22463_Appendix.indd 1104

26/04/16 4:47 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

8.1

1105

that was only unguarded for a brief period of time. This
has happened before, but the dog has always seemed to
recover uneventfully in the past. He is current on his
­vaccines and ­preventive care.

Clinical examination
The dog is quiet, alert, and responsive. He is approximately 7% dehydrated, has a mildly tense abdomen on
palpation, and is slightly icteric. Other physical examination findings are normal.

Differential diagnoses

Figure 8.1 The cat being treated with hemodialysis.

Although expensive, this treatment option can be very
beneficial to the patient. Prior to dialysis treatment, testing for leptospirosis should also be considered. Although
this condition is rare in cats, diagnosis could alter treatment and prognostic recommendations. This cat was
treated with dialysis (Figure 8.1) over a 2-week period,
hospitalized for 1 additional week to gradually reduce
his fluid needs, and recovered uneventfully. He was discharged from hospital with the recommendation that he
be fed a high-quality protein (‘renal’) diet, which he ate
well. His water intake was adequate. After 3 months, his
BUN and creatinine concentrations stabilized at 40 mg/dl
and 2.2 mg/dl, respectively, showing mild continued
azotemia.

Recommended reading

Although many possibilities exist for causing nausea, few
also cause icterus: toxin (cycad, xylitol, aflatoxin, blue–
green algae, acetaminophen, others); extrahepatic biliary
duct obstruction (pancreatitis, inflammation, neoplasia);
infection (leptospirosis, cholangitis, cholangiohepatitis, cholecystitis, combination); neoplasia (lymphoma,
hepatocellular carcinoma); foreign body/gastrointestinal
obstruction.

Which plants are potentially toxic?
The plants listed are known to be potentially toxic to
dogs if ingested. Cycad palms are constantly increasing
in popularity and use in the USA, and pet owners should
be made aware of their potential lethal consequences. All
portions of the plant (stem, leaves, flowers, and especially
seeds) are highly toxic, even in small quantities.

Diagnostic testing
●● CBC: normal
●● Chemistry panel: abnormals listed: ALT = 5,210 U/l

Creighton KJ, Koenigshof AM, Weder CD et al. (2014)
Evaluation of two point-of-care ethylene glycol tests
for dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 24(4):398–401.

CASE 9: CYCAD PLANT CAUSING ACUTE
LIVER FAILURE – JESSICA BULLOCK
Signalment/history
A 2-year-old neutered male Labrador crossbreed dog
is examined because of a 2–3–day history of vomiting
and inappetence. The vomitus initially contained food
and plant material (small amounts of fibrous bark-like
material and grass-like material), but progressively
­
became clear to bilious. The dog has a long history of
­eating foreign objects, trash, and plants. His owners are
avid gardeners and their backyard contains o
­ leanders,
coontie palms, fruit trees, lilies, azaleas, hibiscus, and
­lantanas. The vomiting began a few hours after the owners saw him eating bits of plants from a trimmings pile

K22463_Appendix.indd 1105

●●
●●
●●
●●

(RI, 32–83 U/l); ALP = 3,568 U/l (RI, 11–60); total
­bilirubin = 5.4 mg/dl (RI, 0.3–0.9); BUN = 35 mg/dl
(RI, 8–29); creatinine = 2.0 mg/dl (RI, 0.6–2.0).
Urine SG is >1.050.
Abdominal radiographs are normal.
Abdominal ultrasound shows no abnormalities.
PCR and/or serology testing for leptospirosis are
recommended.

Presumed diagnosis: cycad palm ingestion
Ingestion of cycads (sago palms, cootie palms, fern palms,
cardboard palms) can cause acute liver failure and
death (Figures 9.1, 9.2). All parts of the plant are toxic.
Prognosis is guarded for short-term recovery, and longterm complications, such as cirrhosis, can occur. The laboratory test results have no influence on prognosis. If
recent ingestion has occurred, routine decontamination
efforts are recommended (induction of emesis/gastric

26/04/16 4:47 pm

1106

Appendix Clinical cases

9.1

●● Outcome: the dog responded well to treatment and was
discharged without any subsequent complications.

Other recommended procedures
Placement of a nasogastric or nasoesophageal feeding tube
is often beneficial in cases of cycad ingestion. While primarily used to deliver nutrition to inappetent patients, it can
also provide an easier delivery method for medications and
fluids when encouraging home care for longer recoveries.

CASE 10: CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE –
ROMAIN PARIAUT & CARLEY SAELINGER
Signalment/history

Figure 9.1 A cycad plant.
9.2

A 9-year-old neutered male Cavalier King Charles Spaniel.
Previously healthy with exception of intermittent cough;
last night developed inappetence, lethargy, and increased
respiratory rate, which has worsened overnight.

Clinical examination
The dog is dyspneic and tachypneic with a respiratory
rate of 52 breaths per minute. He is also tachycardic
(160 bpm). A grade 4/6 left apical systolic murmur is auscultated. Lung auscultation reveals fine crackles throughout the left hemithorax. Lung sounds are diffusely harsh.
The dog is mildly hyperthermic (102.7°F [39.3°C]).

Differential diagnosis
Figure 9.2 Fruit of a cycad plant.

lavage, administration of repeated doses of charcoal
due to significant enterohepatic recirculation). Recovery
often requires 3–7 days of supportive care, but can exceed
10 days in more severe cases.

Treatment
Initial supportive care
●● IV crystalloids at 120 ml/kg/day until rehydrated,
then decreased to approximately 60 ml/kg/day.

●● Ampicillin/sulbactam (30 mg/kg IV q8h) to treat
­possible leptospirosis while test results are pending.

●● Maropitant (1 mg/kg SC) as an antinausea medication.
●● Gastroprotectants: famotidine (1 mg/kg q24h), or pantoprazole (1 mg/kg IV q12h), or omeprazole (1 mg/kg
PO q24h).
●● Liver supportive care: N-acetylcysteine at 140 mg/kg
initially, followed q6h by 7 doses of 70 mg/kg IV or PO,
as tolerated; S-adenosylmethionine at 18 mg/kg PO
once daily and/or silymarin at 20–50 mg/kg PO once
daily for at least 30 days.

K22463_Appendix.indd 1106

Left-sided congestive heart failure; degenerative valve
disease; infectious endocarditis; congenital defect;
pneumonia; pulmonary thromboembolism; pulmonary
hypertension.

Diagnostic tests
Thoracic radiographs show generalized cardiomegaly
with moderate to severe left atrial enlargement, d
­ istended
pulmonary vasculature, and an interstitial-to-alveolar
pattern in the perihilar region and right middle and caudal lung lobes (Figure 10.1). A serum biochemistry profile
and complete blood count are within normal limits.

Diagnosis
Left-sided congestive heart failure.

Initial treatment
The dog is placed in oxygen and a CRI of furosemide
is started at 0.5 mg/kg/hour after an initial bolus at
4 mg/kg IV. Pimobendan is administered at 0.25 mg/kg
PO, and scheduled to be given every 12 hours. The dog’s
respiratory rate decreases to 36 breaths per minute and
the heart rate decreases to 100 bpm over the next 6 hours.

26/04/16 4:47 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

10.1

1107

Clinical examination
The dog is bright, alert, and responsive. Intermittent
paroxysms of tachycardia up to 270 bpm and a grade 2/6
left apical systolic heart murmur are noted on thoracic
auscultation. Pulses are fair with intermittent deficits.
Physical examination is otherwise unremarkable.

Differential diagnosis

Figure 10.1 Left heart enlargement and pulmonary edema.

An echocardiogram shows a thickened mitral valve
with secondary severe mitral valve regurgitation and
moderate to severe left atrial enlargement. The underlying cause of the left-sided congestive heart failure is
degenerative mitral valve disease. Thoracic radiographs
are repeated 24 hours after initial hospitalization and
show cardiomegaly with normal pulmonary parenchyma
and pulmonary vasculature. The animal is therefore
ready to be released from the hospital.

Long-term treatment
Furosemide (2 mg/kg PO q12h), pimobendan (0.25 mg/kg
PO q12h), enalapril (0.5 mg/kg PO q12h). Renal values
should be rechecked 1–2 weeks after initiation of therapy.
A mild azotemia should be tolerated as long as the patient
is not showing any clinical signs (nausea, vomiting, inappetence, lethargy). The owner should be instructed to
carefully monitor the resting respiratory rate at home.
It should be <40 breaths per minute. If it increases more
than 25% over 3 days or if it is >40 breaths per minute,
the owner should be instructed to seek veterinary care.
Long-term monitoring should include renal values every
3–6 months and annual thoracic radiographs and echocardiogram to assess for disease progression.

CASE 11: ARRHYTHMOGENIC
CARDIOMYOPATHY – ROMAIN PARIAUT &
CARLEY SAELINGER

Tachycardia: ventricular tachycardia; supraventricular tachycardia; sinus tachycardia. Murmur: mitral
valve insufficiency secondary to arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy; mitral valve insufficiency secondary to
degenerative valve disease; mitral valve insufficiency
secondary to endocarditis. Syncope: tachyarrhythmia
secondary to arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy; poor
cardiac output due to systolic dysfunction when exercising ­
secondary to arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy
or aortic stenosis; pulmonary hypertension; pericardial
effusion.

Provisional diagnosis
The provisional diagnosis is arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy given the breed (Boxer), tachyarrhythmia, murmur, and historical syncope.

Diagnostic tests
Electrocardiogram reveals paroxysms of sustained and
nonsustained ventricular tachycardia (Figure 11.1).
Lidocaine IV bolus administered during sustained ventricular tachycardia converts to normal sinus rhythm.
An echocardiogram reveals moderate left ventricular dilation in diastole and systole. The mitral leaflets
are not thickened. Left ventricular enlargement and
mitral annulus dilation result in displacement of the
leaflets and incomplete closure, and secondary regurgitation. Mild right atrial and right ventricular dilation is
present.
11.1

II

III

Signalment/history
A 6-year-old neutered male Boxer was presented for evaluation of syncope noted during exercise.

K22463_Appendix.indd 1107

Figure 11.1 Ventricular tachycardia of right ventricular origin.

26/04/16 4:47 pm

1108

Appendix Clinical cases

Thoracic radiographs show moderate to severe generalized cardiomegaly with normal pulmonary parenchyma and vasculature.

Conclusion
After administration of an IV bolus of lidocaine, a CRI was
started. Oral sotalol (2 mg/kg q12h) was also administered for long-term management of ventricular arrhythmias. Congestive heart failure was not present, so other
cardiac medications were not prescribed at this time.
This patient is at risk for sudden death and congestive
heart failure.

CASE 12: ARTERIAL THROMBOEMBOLISM –
ROMAIN PARIAUT & CARLEY SAELINGER
Signalment/history
An 8-year-old neutered male Domestic Shorthair cat presented for acute onset paraplegia. He was found next to
the bed vocalizing, nonambulatory, and open-mouth
breathing. He was previously healthy.

Clinical examination
On presentation, the patient was agitated, vocalizing, and
open-mouth breathing. T = 98.3°F (36.8°C), heart rate = 190
bpm, respiratory rate = 80 breaths per minute, mucous
membranes were pink and moist with a normal CRT. A
fixed gallop was present with no murmur or arrhythmia.
Bronchovesicular sounds were increased but otherwise
normal. Motor activity, spinal reflexes, and deep pain
were negative in the hindlimbs and femoral pulses were
absent. The distal hindlimbs were cool with cyanotic nail
beds when compared with the forelimbs.

Differential diagnosis
Arterial thromboembolism (ATE) is the most common cause (approximately 80–90%) of acute limb
paresis/paralysis in feline patients. Other differentials that should be considered: primary neurologic
disease (­spinal trauma, intervertebral disk disease,
­fibrocartilagenous emboli [reported in dogs], neoplasia),
neoplasia ­(neoplastic emboli or paraneoplastic thrombocytosis/hypercoagulability), aortic/arterial foreign body
(rare).

support the diagnosis. Angiography provides a definitive diagnosis but is not commonly performed clinically.
Ultrasound at the level of the distal aortic bifurcation
may identify a thrombus or reduced blood flow but is
highly user dependent. Thoracic radiographs reveal cardiomegaly in 90% of cases and congestive heart failure
(CHF) in approximately 50% of cases. Therefore, chest
radiographs should always be obtained to determine if
the signs of tachpnea or dyspnea result from pain only or
from pulmonary edema. Serum biochemistry may show
elevated ALT, AST, and CPK due to ischemic muscle damage/necrosis and azotemia associated with poor perfusion or thromboembolism proximal to the renal arteries.
An echocardiogram will determine the presence and type
of cardiac disease. Additional findings may include an
enlarged left atrium, decreased systolic function, spontaneous echo contrast (‘smoke’), or a thrombus within
the left atrium (Figure 12.1). An ECG is appropriate if an
arrhythmia is present.

Treatment, prognosis, complications
Treatment is primarily palliative and supportive care.
No specific treatment has shown improved outcome over
cage rest alone. Opioids are the analgesic of choice and
pain management is the most important aspect of acute
treatment. Appropriate treatment of acute CHF is indicated if present. Cautious fluid therapy may be indicated
in patients with poor perfusion that are not eating or
drinking provided active CHF is not present. Medications
to reduce clot extension and for long-term thromboprophylaxis may be used including heparin, low molecular
weight heparin, aspirin, and clopidogrel. Thrombolytics
have been shown to reduce time to spontaneous perfusion
12.1

Diagnostic tests
The diagnosis of ATE is primarily clinical. ‘Quicking’ a
toenail to assess bleeding (typically no or only a minimal
amount of dark colored blood), assessing blood flow with
Doppler ultrasound, and obtaining a differential glucose
or lactate between an affected and an unaffected limb

K22463_Appendix.indd 1108

Figure 12.1 Echocardiogram showing left atrial enlargement
and a possible thrombus.

26/04/16 4:47 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

1109

and functional use of limbs; however, they increase risk of
complications and have not proven effective in improving
outcome or survival. Standard wound and nursing care
of nonambulatory patients is important. Approximately
33–40% of patients survive the acute period with longterm survival ranging from 3 months to 6 years (median
of 6 months). Complications include re-thrombosis, reperfusion syndrome, ischemic necrosis, muscle contracture,
and permanent loss of function.

Differential diagnosis

CASE 13: WEAKNESS IN A CAT – AMANDINE
LEJEUNE & MICHAEL SCHAER

The serum electrolyte abnormalities were persistent.
Because of the clinical findings being compatible with
hyperaldosteronism, a serum sample for aldosterone
determination was submitted to an ­outside laboratory
and the aldosterone concentration was 3,032 pmol/l
(RI, 194–388). Chest radiography was normal. An echocardiogram was done in order to search for any cardiac
abnormality because of the sustained hypertension;
this showed left ventricular concentric hypertrophy
and papillary muscle hypertrophy. An abdominal ultrasound evaluation showed left adrenal gland enlargement (Figure 13.2). The right adrenal gland was visible.
CT (axial) showed a ­normal thorax and an enlarged leftsided adrenal gland with no evidence of nearby tissue
invasion or metastasis.

Signalment/history
A 13-year-old neutered male Domestic Shorthair cat
weighing 8 kg was taken to an emergency veterinary hospital when the owners noticed him unable to greet them
when they came home from work that evening.

Clinical and laboratory examinations
Pertinent clinical findings included generalized
muscular weakness. The cat’s blood pressure ranged
­
from 220 to 260 mmHg. Abnormal serum chemistry
findings included sodium 159 mEq/l (RI, 146–160) and
serum potassium 2.1 mEq/l (RI, 3.6–5.4). The urine
SG was 1.009 with other parameters being normal.
He was referred for ­
further evaluation for possible
aldosteronoma.
At the time of referral, the abnormal physical examination findings included mental dullness while able to
relate to his environment, generalized muscle weakness,
and flaccid ventral cervical flexion (Figure 13.1). There
was a small retinal hemorrhage in his right eye. The rest
of the physical examination was unremarkable.

13.1

Figure 13.1 The cat is showing ventral cervical flexion typical
of hypokalemic myopathy.

K22463_Appendix.indd 1109

With major complaints of progressive muscular
­weakness, hypertension, and right retinal hemorrhage,
the following differentials should be considered: primary
myopathy; metabolic abnormality(ies) such as renal and
electrolyte disorders including hypokalemia and hypernatremia); endocrine abnormalities such as hyperaldosteronism and pheochromocytoma.

Diagnostic evaluation

Medical and surgical treatment
Preoperative treatment consisted of IV fluids with potassium chloride supplementation (60 mEq/l), ­spironolactone
(1 mg/kg PO q12h), and amlodipine (1.25 mg PO q24h). The
cat’s muscular strength and the serum p
­ otassium concentration gradually improved over the next 8 days. Surgery
was performed and a solitary enlarged left ­adrenal gland
was removed without complication. The cat required 6

13.2

Figure 13.2 Abdominal ultrasound examination showing left
adrenal gland enlargement (arrow).

26/04/16 4:47 pm

1110

Appendix Clinical cases

14.1

days of continued medical support with oral potassium
gluconate. The histopathology results showed adrenocortical adenoma and the cat went on to recover well.

Comments
Hyperaldosteronism in the cat is not a rare condition.
It can be caused by adrenocortical hyperplasia affecting
the zone glomerulosa or by an adrenocortical tumor that
can be either an adenoma or an adenocarcinoma. The
tumor can be endocrinologically functional and produce
­excessive amounts of either aldosterone and/or cortisol.
If the tumor is secreting excessive cortisol, it is possible
for the contralateral adrenal gland to become inactive
because of negative feedback inhibition. The patient with
adrenocortical hyperplasia is treated medically with
aldosterone antagonist and hypotensive drugs, while the
adrenal tumor is preferably treated surgically, if possible.
Prognosis varies from good to grave depending on the etiology. The cat in this report had a benign tumor that was
successfully treated with combined medical and surgical
options as described.

CASE 14: MUSCLE ATROPHY IN A DOG –
SHEILA JUSTIZ-CARRERA
Signalment/history
A 10-year-old neutered male Labrador Retriever weighing 36 kg was seen by its veterinarian for the primary
complaints of head muscle atrophy and difficulty with
eating. At that time, atrophy of the left side of the head
was noted and the dog was referred to a neurologist.

Clinical examination
At the time of referral, there was marked atrophy of the
left temporalis and masseter muscles (Figure 14.1). There
was enophthalmia of the left eye and elevation of the third
eyelid. There was absent corneal sensation in the left eye.
The menace response was normal bilaterally, but the palpebral reflex was absent in the left eye, although the patient
would blink on his own. The remaining physical examination parameters were normal.

Abnormalities
Left masticatory muscle atrophy: cranial nerve (CN) V
(mandibular nerve). Absent corneal sensation left eye: CN
V (ophthalmic nerve). Absent left facial sensation with
intact motor: CN V (maxillary nerve). Left enophthalmia,
likely ­secondary to atrophy of pterygoid muscles: CN V
(mandibular nerve). Left elevation of the third eyelid,
likely secondary to enophthalmia.

K22463_Appendix.indd 1110

Figure 14.1 Labrador Retriever showing left-sided temporal
and masseter muscle atrophy and enophthalmos compatible
with left-sided trigeminal nerve pathology.

Neurolocalization
Left trigeminal nerve lesion.

Differential diagnosis
Trigeminal nerve neoplasia: peripheral nerve sheath
tumor vs. lymphoma; trigeminal neuritis: inflammatory
vs. infectious (Neospora canis).

Diagnostic evaluation
CBC and serum chemistry panel were unremarkable.
Thoracic radiographs were unremarkable. MRI of the
brain showed a markedly enlarged and abnormal left
­trigeminal nerve that was compressing the left brainstem. The mass could be tracked out of the skull. There was
marked atrophy of all the left masticatory muscles. These
changes are consistent with a trigeminal nerve tumor.
Differential diagnoses include a malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor, lymphoma or, less likely, a meningioma. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis was unremarkable,
making lymphoma a less likely diagnosis, although it is
still possible.

Medical and surgical treatment
Treatment options to consider include medical palliative
therapy and radiation therapy. Surgical resection of these
lesions is not often recommended, as often it is not possible to resect most of the lesion. Palliative therapy for this
patient included anti-inflammatory doses of prednisone
(0.5 mg/kg/day) and ophthalmic lubricant ointment (left
eye, at least q8h). Radiation therapy was recommended,
but declined by the owners.

26/04/16 4:47 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

Comments
Nerve sheath tumors can affect any peripheral nerve, but
the trigeminal nerve is the most commonly affected cranial nerve. Any of the three branches can be affected and
clinical signs will vary accordingly, although most dogs
show severe masticatory muscle atrophy c­ orresponding
to mandibular branch disease. Long-term prognosis
is grave with survival after diagnosis ranging from 5
to 21 months with a median of 12 months.

CASE 15: A VERY SWEET DOG! – LEO
LONDOÑO
Signalment/history
An 11-year-old spayed female mixed breed dog is examined for evaluation of a 3-day history of generalized
weakness, anorexia, and dark-tarry diarrhea. The dog
had originally presented to the primary veterinarian
2 weeks ago for evaluation of lethargy, polydipsia, and
polyuria. The dog was started on amoxicillin (250 mg PO
q12h). A urine sample was sent to the laboratory and the
results showed a large amount of glucose (1,000 mg/dl)
and ketonuria (2+), with inactive sediment and a urine SG
of 1.031. Based on these results, the primary veterinarian recommended further diagnostics and treatments for
suspected diabetic ketoacidosis, but the owner declined
at that point. The dog’s condition continued to deteriorate despite antibiotic therapy, and she was brought to
the emergency service for further evaluation. The dog
was previously diagnosed with sudden acquired retinal
degeneration syndrome 2 years ago and became blind.
She was also diagnosed with hyperadrenocorticism
around the same time, based on an ACTH stimulation test,
but no treatment was started due to lack of major clinical signs. Otherwise the dog is current on vaccines and
receives monthly flea and heartworm prevention (spinosad + milbemycin oxime) as well as daily glucosamine/
chondroitin supplementation.

Clinical examination
The dog is initially quiet, alert, and responsive. Body
weight is 5.89 kg, BCS is 6/9, and temperature is 101.3°F
(38.5°C). She is bilaterally blind with absent pupillary
light reflexes, dazzle, and menace responses in both eyes.
The dog is ambulatory with mild generalized weakness
and muscle tremors. Heart rate is 124 bpm with a grade
2/6 left systolic, apical heart murmur; synchronous and
bounding femoral pulses are also detected. Respiratory
rate is 18 breaths per minute and the lung sounds are
clear. Mucous membranes are pale pink and tacky with
a CRT of 2 seconds. The dog has sunken eyes and there

K22463_Appendix.indd 1111

1111

is prolonged skin tenting, giving an estimated 10% dehydration. The abdomen is pendulous and ­
nonpainful,
and hepatosplenomegaly is detected with abdominal
palpation. Rectal examination yields soft feces with
­
melena. Peripheral lymph nodes are soft, small and
symmetrical.

Initial diagnostics (abnormalities listed only)
Biochemistry
ALP = 508 U/L (RI, 8–114); albumin = 1.6 g/dl (RI, 2.9–3.8);
calcium = 7.2 mg/dl (RI, 8
­ .9–10.8); ­phosphorus = 8.0 mg/dl
(RI, 2.7–5.6); creatinine = 4.7 mg/dl (RI, 0.6–1.7); BUN = 94
mg/dl (RI, 8–25); glucose = 1,196 mg/dl (RI, 79–120); sodium
= 125 mEq/l (RI, 142–153); potassium = 6.7 mEq/l (RI, 3.5–
5.2); chloride = 90 mEq/l (RI, 107–115); anion gap = 35.7
mEq/l (RI, 14–24).

Hematology
WBCs = 32,050/µl (RI, 5,000–13,000); neutrophils =
26,080/µl (RI, 2,700–8,900); bands = 2,900/µl; toxicity, 2+;
monocytes = 3,410/µl (RI, 100–800); RBCs = 3.68 × 106/µl
(RI, 5.7–8.3); hemoglobin = 7.6 g/dl (RI, 14–20); PCV = 21%
(RI, 40–56); MCV = 60.3 fl [RI, 64–74]; MCHC = 34.1 g/dl
(RI, 33–38); platelets = 9.2 × 105/µl (RI, 1.3–3.9).

Urinalysis
SG = 1.018; glucose = 2,000 mg/dl; ketones = 40–80 mg/dl;
blood, trace; pH = 5.5; dipstick: protein, 2+; SSA protein,
1+; WBCs, 4–8/HPF; RBCs, 0–3/HPF; bacteria (many
monomorphobacilli); crystals, occasional amorphous.
Sediment evaluation also revealed budding yeast and
pseudohyphae.

Venous blood
pH = 7.12 (RI, 7.335–7.446); pCO2 = 25.5 mmHg (RI, 35–40);
HCO3 = 8.4 mEq/l (RI, 18–27).

Problem list
Severe hyperglycemia; moderate azotemia; moderate
hyponatremia; mild hyperkalemia; severe hypoalbuminemia; severe metabolic acidosis; severely elevated
anion gap; moderate leukocytosis with left shift and toxicity; severe microcytic, normochromic anemia; severe
thrombocytosis; glucosuria, ketonuria; pyuria, bacteri­
uria and yeast infection; severe dehydration; heart murmur; melena; hepatosplenomegaly.

Case discussion
This dog has been diagnosed with diabetic ketoacidosis. The hyperglycemia in this case is severe and raises
the concern for hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome

26/04/16 4:47 pm

1112

Appendix Clinical cases

(HHS). The diagnostic criteria in veterinary medicine for
HHS include a serum glucose concentration >600 mg/dl
(30 mmol/l), absence of urine ketones, and osmolality
>350 mOsm/kg. The human guidelines for HHS are more
extensive, but the presence of small quantities of urine
ketones does not exclude HHS. Osmolality can be measured by freezing-point depression or calculated with the
formula (using conventional values):
Osm(serum): 2(Na+) + (BUN/2.8) + (GLU/18) → 2(125) +
(94/2.8) + (1196/18) : 350 mOsm/kg
Due to the equilibration of BUN across cell membranes,
using the effective osmolality formula may provide a better estimate of osmolality:
Effective Osm(serum): 2(Na+) + (GLU/18) → 2(125) + (94/2.8):
316 mOsm/kg
Based on the estimated effective osmolality and presence of ketones in the urine, this patient is not considered
to have pure HHS, although the dog can have a combined
hyperosmolar ketoacidosis disorder. The blood work
results also had moderate azotemia (with relatively dilute
urine in light of the degree of dehydration) as well as
moderate hyperkalemia and hyperphosphatemia. These
results are consistent with acute kidney injury (AKI) and
reduced glomerular filtration rate, which may worsen the
hyperglycemia and lead to HHS syndrome in the future.
Other possible causes of AKI in this patient are: pyelonephritis secondary to ascending bacterial and fungal
urinary tract infections; thromboembolism secondary to
thrombocytosis and previously diagnosed Cushing’s syndrome; and hypotension due to marked dehydration and
potential hypovolemia. The severity of the metabolic acidosis and increased anion gap are consistent with accumulation of lactic acid, secondary to poor tissue p
­ erfusion,
uremic acids, and ketoacids. The expected compensation
for the metabolic acidosis can be calculated by using:

by the high levels of glucose. Corrected sodium can be calculated as follows:
Na+(corr): Na+(measured) + 1.6 ([measured glucose - normal
glucose]/100)
Na+(corr): 125 + 1.6 ([1196 - 100]/100) : 142.5 mEq/l
The hyperkalemia is explained by the renal impairment interfering with excretion and the effects of hyperosmolality on the serum potassium concentration where
cellular potassium is drawn into the plasma space.
The dog had a leukocytosis characterized by a
­neutrophilia with a left shift and toxicity, likely secondary to the bacterial and fungal infections of its urinary
system, in addition to diabetic ketoacidosis, which can
impair leukocyte destruction of infectious organisms.
The nonregenerative anemia based on red blood cell
indices (microcytic, normochromic) is likely secondary
to chronic inflammation, but at this point chronic kidney disease and/or bleeding from the GI tract (melena)
with no time for regeneration have to be considered.
The newly identified heart murmur in this dog can be
physiologic secondary to anemia and dehydration, but
a primary cardiomyopathy and vegetative endocarditis cannot be ruled out. The low albumin levels in this
patient can be attributed to several factors including loss
from GI bleeding, renal loss, decreased production (negative phase protein), decreased intake from anorexia, and/
or translocation from endothelial dysfunction.

Conclusion
Diabetic ketoacidosis can lead to severe systemic illness
leading to a myriad of electrolyte, acid–base, and hematologic disorders. A thorough analysis of serum biochemistry results and ample knowledge of pathophysiology will
prevent the clinician from misdiagnosing patients with
hyperosmolar syndromes, as well as misinterpreting
­various forms of hyponatremia.

CASE 16: SEVERE NECROTIZING
PANCREATITIS – LEO LONDOÑO

0.7 mmHg decrease in pCO2 per 1 mEq/l decrease in
[HCO3-] +/- 3:
0.7 mmHg × (22 mEq/l – 8.4 mEq/l) : 9.5

Signalment/history

In this case the primary respiratory compensation is
appropriate, as the pCO2 in this dog is approximately 10
mmHg lower than the low end of the reference interval.
Other electrolyte abnormalities included moderate to
severe hyponatremia and hypochloremia. The low sodium
in this dog is consistent with spurious hyponatremia secondary to the osmotic pull of water into the vasculature

A 7-year-old spayed female mixed breed dog is referred
for evaluation of vomiting and anorexia over the past
few days. Four days prior, the dog vomited after being fed
dinner and continued to vomit a mixture of food and bile
throughout the night. The next day she stopped eating
and was hiding in a corner, appearing painful. She was
taken to her veterinarian where blood work and abdominal radiographs were done. The blood test results showed

K22463_Appendix.indd 1112

26/04/16 4:47 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

an elevated BUN, decreased protein and a
­ lbumin, and
increased amylase. Radiographs were interpreted as
normal. She was hospitalized with supportive t­ reatment
including IV fluid therapy, penicillin, dexamethasone,
and butorphanol/tramadol for pain management.
Blood tests were repeated 2 days later and showed a
further increase in BUN and decreased albumin, along
with severe leukocytosis characterized by a mature neutrophilia. On the day of referral, the dog remained anorectic and began to regurgitate. She also developed
black-tarry feces and her mentation deteriorated.

Clinical examination
The dog is alert, responsive, and ambulatory. She is
febrile with a body temperature of 103.6°F (39.8°C), body
weight is 13.2 kg, and BCS is 6/9. The dog has tachycardia with a heart rate of 180 bpm with bounding and synchronous femoral pulses. Thoracic auscultation is normal
and the dog is eupneic. Abdominal palpation showed that
she had a mildly tense abdomen with nonlocalizing discomfort. Rectal examination produced melena. Mild to

1113

moderate pitting edema was identified over the hocks
and inguinal region. The rest of the physical examination was normal.

Diagnostics
Radiography
Diffuse absence of peritoneal detail with a nodular
appearance (Figures 16.1a–c). Diagnostic interpretation
was consistent with suspected carcinomatosis with peritoneal effusion. Normal thorax.

Abdominal ultrasound
Moderate amount of anechoic free fluid; hyperechoic
mesentery with multiple hypoechoic nodules throughout (Figure 16.2a); pancreas is enlarged and hypoechoic
(Figure 16.2b); duodenum is corrugated. Diagnostic interpretation was consistent with possible carcinomatosis
with peritoneal effusion and steatitis, pancreatitis, or
pancreatic neoplasia such as adenocarcinoma, as well as
duodenitis.

16.1

a

b

c

Figures 16.1a–c Abdominal radiographs showing diffuse loss of detail due to abdominal effusion.

K22463_Appendix.indd 1113

26/04/16 4:47 pm

1114

Appendix Clinical cases

16.2

Biochemistry
ALP = 379 U/L (RI, 8–114); ALT = 113 U/L (RI, 18–64); AST =
244 U/L (RI, 15–52); total bilirubin = 0.9 mg/dl (RI, 0.1–0.4);
total protein = 2.9 g/dl (RI, 5.6–7.5); albumin = 0.9 g/dl (RI,
2.9–3.8); calcium = 7.3 mg/dl (RI, 8.9–10.8); phosphorus =
8.1 mg/dl (RI, 2.7–5.6); creatinine = 3.5 mg/dl (RI, 0.6–1.7);
BUN = 77 mg/dl (RI, 8–25); glucose = 52 mg/dl (RI, 79–120);
sodium = 163 mEq/l (RI, 142–153); potassium = 4.7 mEq/l
(RI, 3.5–5.2); chloride = 126 mEq/l (RI, 107–115); lactate =
0.9 mmol/l (RI, <2.5).

Clinical recommendations
a

b
Figures 16.2a, b (a) Ultrasonogram showing abnormal
pancreas. (b) Ultrasonogram showing abnormal mesentery.

Abdominal effusion cytology and
biochemical analysis
Exudate; degenerative neutrophils without presence of intracellular bacteria; rare extracellular bacilli
present. Glucose = 44 mg/dl (RI, 79–120); lactate =
­
2.1 mmol/l (RI, <2.5).

Pancreas cytology
Suppurative inflammation and evidence of mineralization. Mildly atypical pancreatic epithelium is suggestive
of reactive pancreatic epithelium. The degree of inflammation and the mild atypia of pancreatic epithelial cells
are most consistent with pancreatitis. However, the less
likely consideration of an inflamed pancreatic carcinoma
cannot definitely be excluded on the basis of this aspirate.

K22463_Appendix.indd 1114

The patient was treated with Plasma-lyte 56 and 5%
dextrose solution IV, human albumin 25% (100 ml IV/2
hours), ampicillin–sulfabactam (50 mg/kg IV q8h), enrofloxacin (15 mg/kg IV q24h), maropitant (10 mg/kg q24h),
and methadone (0.2 mg/kg IV q6h). Due to the dog’s deteriorating condition, presence of an abdominal exudative effusion with evidence of extracellular bacilli, along
with glucose and lactate differentials of the effusion
vs. peripheral blood, the dog was sent to surgery for an
abdominal exploratory because of a suspect septic abdomen. Surgery showed multifocal plaque-like nodules diffusely distributed through the greater omentum, body
wall, and mesenteric fat, and scattered plaques on the
diaphragm and visceral surfaces of the spleen, liver, and
pancreas. The pancreas was surrounded by moderately
thickened fat and had a small area of mild thickening
on the right lobe. During the dog’s recovery from surgery, she became more painful and her fever increased
to 104°F (40°C). The dog was started on a fentanyl IV CRI
(5 µg/kg/hour), lidocaine IV CRI (25 µg/kg/minute), and
ketamine IV CRI (10 µg/kg/minute). The dog was monitored overnight and the next day she developed cardiopulmonary arrest. Closed-chest cerebrocardiopulmonary
resuscitation was instituted but discontinued at the owners’ request. The dog’s body was submitted to necropsy
(Figures 16.3a, b).

Necropsy report
●● Pancreatitis: necrotizing, diffuse, marked, subacute
to chronic, with saponification of fat and necrotizing
steatitis.
●● Hepatitis: lymphoplasmacytic and neutrophilic,
chronic.
●● Fibrous adhesions: multifocal, moderate, subacute to
chronic, omentum and spleen.
●● Peritonitis: fibrinous, locally extensive, mild to
moderate.

26/04/16 4:47 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

1115

16.3

a

b

Figures 16.3a, b Necropsy findings.

●● Peritoneal and pleural effusion: hemorrhagic, mild
(thorax) to moderate (abdomen), with lipid droplets.
●● Petechial hemorrhages: multifocal to coalescing, mild,
acute, ventral abdominal skin.

parasitism), internal hemorrhage (e.g. distended abdomen), or GI hemorrhage (e.g. perineal blood). Therefore,
likely causes for the anemia are decreased RBC production and occult GI hemorrhage. The murmur is secondary
to the anemia.

Conclusion

Differential diagnosis

Necrotizing pancreatitis is an acute and devastating
syndrome that may progress to systemic inflammatory
response syndrome, DIC, and sepsis, as suspected in this
case. Mortality rates in humans can reach up to 30% in
cases complicated by multiple organ dysfunction. Surgical
intervention is indicated for those cases in which infected
necrosis or abscess is documented. Despite surgical intervention, these patients carry a poor prognosis.

Causes of chronic disease, ill thrift, and anemia in a young
cat include: viral (FeLV, FIV, feline panleukopenia virus)
infection; intestinal parasites; systemic fungal infection;
lymphoma; mycoplasmosis; chronic or congenital kidney
disease.

CASE 17: SYSTEMIC HISTOPLASMOSIS –
KATIE M. BOES & ROSE E. RASKIN
Signalment/history
A 2-year-old indoor/outdoor spayed female Domestic
Shorthair cat is presented for a 3-week history of weight
loss and lethargy.

Clinical examination
The cat is quiet, alert, responsive, and mentally dull with
normal vital signs. There are general signs of ill thrift,
including dull hair coat, poor BCS (2/9), and mild muscle
atrophy of the hindlimbs. Mucous membranes are pale
and the cat is estimated to be 8% dehydrated. A grade 2/6
­systolic heart murmur is auscultated.

Provisional hematologic abnormalities
Pale mucous membranes suggest anemia. Since icterus is
not observed, hemolytic anemia is less likely. There is no
evidence of external hemorrhage (e.g. trauma, external

K22463_Appendix.indd 1115

Laboratory tests
A FeLV/FIV SNAP test was negative. A serum chemistry
panel was consistent with stress (glucose = 184 mg/dl; RI,
71–165), inflammation (albumin = 2.8 g/dl [RI, 3.0–4.0];
globulins = 5.4 g/dl [RI, 3.0–5.2]), and minimal cholestasis (GGT = 2 U/L [RI, 0–1]; total bilirubin = 1.3 mg/dl [RI,
0.0–0.4]). A CBC (Table 17.1) and blood smear review
(Figure 17.1) were also performed.
Blood smear review: few schistocytes and a
­ canthocytes;
nRBCs are metarubricytes; many neutrophils with Döhle
bodies and foamy cytoplasm; rare small ovoid yeast
forms within monocytes.

Interpretation
The moderate to marked normocytic hypochromic
­anemia is primarily due to decreased production since
it is nonregenerative, there is other evidence of hematopoietic hypoplasia (thrombocytopenia), and bone
marrow injury is suspected (inappropriate metarubricytosis). Anemia of chronic disease may be contributing
to the anemia, but is not expected to cause this severity of anemia by itself. The schistocytes, acanthocytes,
and thrombocytopenia raise concern for concurrent

26/04/16 4:47 pm

1116

Appendix Clinical cases

Table 17.1 Hemogram results.

Clinical diagnosis
The diagnosis is systemic histoplasmosis with probable
bone marrow infection and DIC.

Test

Result

Reference interval (from
author’s lab)

RBC

3.70 × 106/µl

7.28–11.36

Hemoglobin

5.3 g/dl

12.1– 6.7

Hematocrit

17.1%

33.7–47.5

MCV

46.2 fl

38.4–49.2

MCHC

31.0 g/dl

34.1–37.0

Reticulocytes

15,400/µl

13,050–71,570

nRBCs

6/100 WBCs

0–1

WBCs

5,302/µl

4,250–11,360

Segmented
neutrophils

3,287/µl

2,272–9,639

Signalment/history

Band
neutrophils

212/µl

0–0

A 3-year-old neutered male domestic cat is presented for
sudden onset lethargy and inappetence. He is a primarily
indoor cat, but does have occasional access to the outdoors.

Lymphocytes

1,750/µl

804–9,240

Monocytes

53/µl

0–952

Platelets

97,000/µl

148,700–531,600

Case outcome
The cat was given a guarded prognosis for recovery, and
the owners elected to euthanize the cat. A necropsy was
not performed, but the owners authorized aspiration of
the bone marrow after euthanasia. Cytologic evaluation
of the bone marrow confirmed granulomatous ­
fungal
myelitis resulting in erythroid hypoplasia, myeloid
hyperplasia, and megakaryocytic hypoplasia.

CASE 18: ANTICOAGULANT RODENTICIDE
INGESTION – BOBBI CONNER

Clinical examination

17.1

The cat is moderately mentally depressed on examination. Vital signs are: temperature 99.3oF (37.4oC), heart rate
240 bpm, respiratory rate 24 breaths per minute. Mucous
membranes are pale pink with a CRT of 2 s­ econds. Lung
sounds are clear bilaterally and no abnormal heart sounds
are heard. Femoral pulses are normal and synchronous
with the heart rate. The cat is uncomfortable on gentle palpation of the right forelimb, and a soft tissue swelling is
noted in the area of the proximal right humerus. A mild,
weight-bearing lameness is noted on the right forelimb.

Differential diagnosis

Figure 17.1 Three small, ovoid yeasts (arrows) in the cytoplasm
of a monocyte.

microangiopathic hemolysis and platelet consumption
secondary to DIC. There is no evidence of blood loss anemia, such as increased BUN relative to creatinine or panhypoproteinemia. The left shift and toxic neutrophils
(Döhle bodies and foamy cytoplasm) denote inflammation. The cause for the ­hematologic changes is present
on the blood smear as intracytoplasmic yeast consistent
with Histoplasma capsulatum.

K22463_Appendix.indd 1116

Given this cat’s age, onset of signs, and exposure to the
outdoors, trauma and toxin exposure should be strongly
considered. Infectious causes of possible anemia should
also be contemplated.
Shaving of the fur over the right shoulder reveals
severe bruising associated with the soft tissue swelling
(Figure 18.1). PCV/TS (27%, 4.8 g/dl) are consistent with
blood loss anemia. Radiographs rule out a fracture. No
other sources of bleeding are identified.

Provisional diagnosis
Given the new information, the presumptive diagnosis is
ingestion of an anticoagulant rodenticide. On laboratory
testing, PT and PTT are both severely prolonged (a stable
clot never forms). Platelet count was estimated to be normal on a peripheral blood smear.

26/04/16 4:48 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

1117

19.1

18.1

Figure 18.1 Severe bruising and swelling over the right
shoulder.

Treatment, follow up
Treatment with fresh frozen plasma (10 ml/kg IV over
2 hours) and vitamin K1 supplementation (5 mg/kg
IV given slowly once over several hours) are initiated.
Two hours after completion of the plasma transfusion, the
PT and PTT times are normal. The cat becomes brighter
and begins eating. The cat is discharged the following
morning on vitamin K1 at 3 mg/kg/day PO for 4 weeks.
Three days after discontinuing vitamin K1 supplementation, the cat’s PT and PTT are still normal. No additional
rechecks are recommended.

Conclusion
This cat was treated presumptively for anticoagulant
rodenticide ingestion and confirmation was achieved by
favorable response to therapy. In some cases, testing for
proteins induced by vitamin K absence or antagonism may
be helpful; however, results of this test are not immediately
available and treatment must be started prior to receiving
results in clinically bleeding animals. This cat was presented with bleeding in an atypical location, and possible
exposure to toxins and his young age increase the suspicion
of intoxication. Additionally, the degree of bleeding seen in
the absence of other signs of severe trauma (i.e. fracture)
increased suspicion for a coagulation abnormality.
Editors’ note: A rapid IV injection of vitamin K1 as a
bolus can cause an anaphylactoid reaction. This can be
avoided by administering the vitamin K1 SC or IV slowly
over 12 or more hours; however, anaphylactoid reactions
can still occur with slow administration techniques, albeit
uncommonly.

CASE 19: SKIN HYPERSENSITIVITY – DIANE
T. LEWIS
Signalment/history
A 7-year-old neutered male Domestic Shorthair cat
(Figure 19.1) is presented with a 6-month history of

K22463_Appendix.indd 1117

Figure 19.1 The cat on presentation.

progressive erosion, ulceration, alopecia, and severe pruritus of the face. The cat lives indoors with four unaffected
cats. The owner has been applying a corticosteroid cream
twice daily. Lesions are limited to the head.

Laboratory tests
Skin scrapings and fecal floatation are negative, a dermatophyte culture is pending, and surface cytology of the
erosions yields occasional Malassezia yeasts and coccoid
bacteria.
The bacteria and yeast are likely secondary to an
underlying disease but contributing to the pruritus.

Initial treatment
Amoxicillin–clavulanate (PO q12h), itraconazole (PO, once
daily, two consecutive days/week), and selamectin (topically every 2 weeks) are initiated. An Elizabethan collar
is placed.
Four weeks later, there is no improvement in the
pruritus and the facial lesions are progressing. Surface
cytology is negative; dermatophyte culture indicates
saprophytic contaminants. Three doses of selamectin
­
have been applied to the skin of the dorsal neck.

26/04/16 4:48 pm

1118

Appendix Clinical cases

Further laboratory diagnostic procedures
Two 6 mm skin specimens are submitted for histopathology. Results indicate an eosinophilic dermatitis with epidermal necrosis and serocellular crust.

Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses include food hypersensitivity,
cutaneous adverse drug reaction, allergic contact dermatitis, severe mosquito bite hypersensitivity, feline herpesvirus, and irritant contact dermatitis.

Further considerations
●● Review the systemic drug and vaccine history (there
is no oral medication or vaccine history in this cat in
the 6 months preceding lesion development).
●● Review use of topical products (owner is requested to
bring in and discontinue use of any and all topical
medications used on the cat).
●● A novel protein food elimination diet was planned
pending review of topical medications.

Case update
Medications brought in by the owner included an overthe-counter neomycin–bacitracin ointment. The owner
began applying the ointment 6 months previously when
19.2

a single papule was noted on the cat’s dorsal muzzle.
Within 2 weeks of discontinuation of all topical products
(including the neomycin ointment), the cat was notably
less pruritic and the lesions were less erythematous. Six
weeks after discontinuation of topical products, the cat
was not pruritic and re-epithelialization of the skin of
the face was occurring. The lesions healed with extensive
scarring (Figure 19.2) of the muzzle, but not of the periocular areas.
Editors’ note: Neomycin is a known cause of skin
hypersensitivity, making a thorough history of utmost
importance, as seen in this case.

CASE 20: HYPERVISCOSITY SYNDROME
SECONDAY TO IGM MACROGLOBULINEMIA –
DENNIS E. BROOKS
Signalment/history
A 9-year-old, male fawn Great Dane. The dog presented
with a history of intermittent epistaxis, anorexia with
weight loss, possible seizures, and progressive loss of
vision over the past 3 months. The left eye became red
and painful 2 weeks prior to examination.

Initial clinical findings
Physical examination revealed a quiet, thin dog in no
apparent distress. Vital signs were within normal limits.
Ophthalmic examination demonstrated severe visual
deficits. A weak right direct pupillary light reflex (PLR)
was present. No other PLRs could be detected. Schirmer
tear test values were 15 and 18 mm/minute in the right
eye and left eye, respectively. Intraocular pressure (IOP)
by applanation tonometry was 12 and 65 mmHg in the
right eye and left eye, respectively. Examination of the left
eye revealed buphthalmos, slight blepharospasm, epiphora, conjunctival hyperemia and chemosis, episcleral
congestion, and superficial and deep circumferential corneal neovascularization. Generalized corneal edema prevented further examination of the left eye (Figure 20.1).
A mydriatic pupil, total retinal detachment in a ‘morning
glory’-type pattern, and areas of retinal thinning were
present in the right eye (Figure 20.2). The retinal veins
were slightly distended with intraretinal hemorrhages
noted near the right optic nerve head.

Differential considerations

Figure 19.2 The cat post treatment showing extensive scarring
of the muzzle.

K22463_Appendix.indd 1118

Retinal detachments (RDs) can be congenital and associated with retinal dysplasia and multiple congenital
anomalies. They may also be acquired. Acquired RD can
be exudative or be caused by vitreal traction. Exudative
or bullous RD can be associated with infection, including

26/04/16 4:48 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

20.1

1119

hemorrhage or uveitis. Rhegmatogenous RD from tears or
holes in the retina can result from retinal degeneration,
myopia, glaucoma, intraocular surgery, vitreous degeneration, and trauma. The glaucoma in this case could be
primary but was most likely secondary to uveitis.

Laboratory diagnostic tests requested and
results
The results of the diagnostic work up are summarized
here and listed in Tables 20.1 and 20.2:

●● Hematology. Moderately severe normocytic/normo-

Figure 20.1 Generalized corneal edema and neovascularization
in the glaucomatous left eye.

●●

20.2

●●

●●

●●
●●

●●
●●
●●
●●
Figure 20.2 Bullous retinal detachment with many intraretinal
hemorrhages. Right eye.

chromic nonregenerative anemia (PCV = 21%) and
slight leucopenia (WBC = 4,200/µl). Hyperproteinemia
(8.8 g/dl), slight hypofibrinogenemia, and marked
rouleaux formation were reported.
Serum chemistry panel. The most striking findings
were hypoalbuminemia (1.2 g/dl) with hyperglobulinemia (7.5 g/dl). There was also mild elevation of
the renal parameters.
Urinalysis. Isosthenuric urine with 4+ proteinuria was
present. Many bacteria and WBCs were noted on sediment examination. Culture and sensitivity yielded a
4+ growth of E. coli sensitive to cephalosporins.
Radiography. There were no radiographic abnormalities of the thorax and abdomen. In particular, there
were no osteolytic lesions and no apparent neoplastic
masses.
Ultrasonography. RD, right eye; no significant fi
­ nding,
left eye.
Cytology. Bone marrow core samples revealed a hypoplastic bone marrow with small clusters of malignant
looking lymphocytes noted in a few samples.
Serum protein electrophoresis. Revealed a monoclonal gammopathy in the gamma region.
Immunoelectrophoresis. Nearly all (90%) of the
immunoglobulin was IgM. Normal is <10%.
Urine electrophoresis. High albumin levels. Heat test
for Bence-Jones proteins was negative.
Serum viscosity. 5.2, with normal in the author’s
­laboratory being <3.

Initial treatment and rationale
blastomycosis, cryptococcosis, toxoplasmosis, geotrichosis, protothecosis, and coccidioidomycosis, or be from
neoplasia such as lymphosarcoma, multiple myeloma,
fibrosarcoma, or reticulosis. RD can be associated with
vascular diseases such as hypertension or hyperviscosity
syndrome. Sometimes the cause is idiopathic. Traction
RD from vitreal degeneration can result from vitreal

K22463_Appendix.indd 1119

The history, ocular changes, and hematologic data were
consistent with a diagnosis of hyperviscosity syndrome
secondary to IgM macroglobulinemia. Alleviation of the
hyperviscosity syndrome by decreasing IgM production
by the abnormal lymphocytes was attempted with alternate day melphelan (2 mg PO) and prednisone (25 mg PO)
therapy, and weekly vincristine (0.65 mg IV). The owner

26/04/16 4:48 pm

1120

Appendix Clinical cases

refused plasmapheresis therapy. Cephalexin was prescribed to treat the urinary tract infection.
No treatment of the right RD was attempted due to the
severity of the lesions. The primary aim of therapy in the
left eye was to minimize pain associated with the elevated
IOP. Vision was thought to be lost. A carbonic anhydrase
inhibitor, methazolamide (100 mg PO q8h), to decrease
aqueous humor formation, and topical 2% pilocarpine/
1% epinephrine (q8h, left eye) to increase aqueous outflow and decrease aqueous formation, were prescribed.
Progress of therapy was monitored by weekly CBCs,
serum protein electrophoresis, and IOP measurement.

Progress report
The dog’s initial response to therapy was favorable. He
began to eat and was more active. The IOP 24 hours following initial therapy was 15 and 9 mmHg in the left eye and
right eye, respectively. The left eye was less painful.
The IOP in the left eye remained at a level of 12–15 mmHg
over the next 3 months. The left cornea became progressively pigmented and the left globe phthisical.

Follow-up laboratory work (Tables 20.1 and 20.2) indicated little improvement of the systemic disease. WBC
counts remained low, viscosity measurements were
the same, and lgM levels remained elevated. A repeat
bone marrow biopsy 2 months following examination
revealed hypocellularity with a large percentage of
immature lymphoid cells. The dog developed severe
­diarrhea after 3 months of therapy and was euthanized.
Histopathology revealed a multifocal lymphocytoid
neoplasia of the spleen and bone marrow, and chronic,
diffuse membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis. The
right retina was detached with a large amount of PASpositive subretinal fluid present. Intraretinal P
­ AS-positive
deposits, retinal vessel dilatation, and r­etinal pigment
epithelium hyperplasia were noted (Figure 20.3). The
left globe was reduced in size with marked corneal and
scleral thickening, corneal neovascularization and pigmentation, fibrous tissue proliferation in the anterior and
vitreal chambers, peripheral anterior synechiae, intravitreal hemorrhage, and severe retinal disorganization.

Table 20.1
Initial

Weeks post therapy
2

3

4

12

Serum chemistries
SGPT (U/L)

16

ALP (U/L)

34

35

Ca (mg/dl)

9.5

10.3

Cl (mEq/l)

116

110

P (mg/dl)

5.4

4

Na (mEq/l)

154

150

Creatinine (mg/dl)

1.2

2.1

Glucose (mg/dl)

125

79

BUN (mg/dl)

33

24

Albumin (g/dl)

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.1

Globulin (g/dl)

7.5

8.1

7.8

8.1

Total protein (g/dl)

8.8

9.5

9.4

9.2

Serum viscosity

5.2

K22463_Appendix.indd 1120

2.7

See Table 20.2

26/04/16 4:48 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

Initial

1121

Weeks post therapy
2

3

4

12

4,400

4,000

32

35

CBC
RBC (×106/µl)

3.2

5.24

WBC (/µl)

4,200

Hemoglobin (g/dl)

7.7

PCV (%)

21

MCV (fl)

67

66

MCHC (g/dl)

34

35

MCH (pg)

24

24

Diff. bands (%)

1.5

3

Neutrophils (%)

80.5

79

Lymphocytes (%)

10

4

Monocytes

8

4

Fibrinogen (mg/dl)

100

100

Plasma protein (g/dl)

8.8

Platelets (×105/µl)

300,000

200,000

250,000

1.027

1.034

1.025

4,500

3,900
12.5

30

34.6

Urinalysis
Urine SG

Note: Refer to cases 15 and 16 for general RIs. Serum viscosity RI = 1.57–1.69 mPas.

Table 20.2
Initial

Weeks post therapy
1

2

3

8

12

IgM levels (mg/ml)

9.35

9.4

9.4

9.2

9.1

8.9

Viscosity

5.2

5.0

5.1

5.1

5.5

5.2

Note: IgM RI = 100–400 mg/dl; serum viscosity RI = 1.57–1.69 mPas.

K22463_Appendix.indd 1121

26/04/16 4:48 pm

1122

Appendix Clinical cases

20.3

Figure 20.3 Note the PAS-positive subretinal exudate in the
left eye. PAS, ×250.

Clinical diagnoses
●● RD in right eye secondary to hyperviscosity syndrome
associated with Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia.

●● Secondary glaucoma and phthisis bulbus – left eye.
●● Glomerulonephritis.

Summary
Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia is a malignant proliferation of B lymphocytes that secrete IgM into the serum.
Serum viscosity increases due to the large size and shape
of the IgM molecule.
Hyperviscosity is believed to be the primary cause of
clinical symptoms in this and other monoclonal gammopathies, as infiltration of ocular structures by neoplastic cells is an unusual feature. Lethargy, weakness,
congestive heart failure, neural and renal disease, bleeding diastheses, and ocular changes have been reported in
human and canine patients with Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia. Ophthalmic disease is reported in 60–70%
of human patients.
Intravascular hyperviscosity in Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia produces a pattern of retinal changes
including vessel distension, ‘string of sausages’ appearance of vessels, intraretinal hemorrhages, retinal and
optic disk edema, and serous RD. Retinal hemorrhages
result from compromise of the retinal vasculature and
platelet dysfunction produced by coating of platelets
with IgM. Reversal of hyperviscosity-related retinopathy has been documented in humans and dogs, but was
not possible in this case due to the severity of the lesions.
The pathophysiology of the RD seen in this case and in

K22463_Appendix.indd 1122

a human patient with Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia may be unique. A recent report in a human patient
showed the presence of IgM surrounding the photoreceptors. These authors postulated that a transretinal pigment
epithelium route for Ig deposition in the subretinal space
would increase the osmotic pressure to cause serous elevation of the retina. The intraretinal PAS-positive deposits seen in a human patient have been shown to contain
IgM. The presence of such deposits in this case suggest a
similar etiology for the right RD, but immunoperoxidase
and immunofluorescent studies on formalin fixed sections to detect IgM were negative. Retrospectively, had
Michel’s fixative been used, a positive result might have
been obtained.
Keratoconjunctivitis and secondary glaucoma have
been reported in humans with Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia. No explanation for the glaucoma was
suggested, but intraocular inflammation or hemorrhage
associated with the syndrome could have compromised
the iridocorneal angle.
Plasmapheresis is the therapy of choice in syndromes of
serum hyperviscosity, as most IgM molecules are located
in the intravascular compartment and their removal
eliminates the hyperviscoisty and ameliorates the clinical signs if performed early enough. Cytotoxic drugs are
believed to be an effective alternative to plasmapheresis
for treating concurrent hyperviscosity syndrome and
lymphoproliferative disease if the hyperviscosity syndrome is not severe. The permanent ocular changes, the
dog’s initial positive response to medical therapy, and the
risk of infection and possibility of defective hemostasis
associated with plasmapheresis dissuaded the owner
from choosing this mode of therapy.

CASE 21: ONION TOXICITY – LISA A. MURPHY
& KENNETH J. DROBATZ
Signalment/history
An otherwise healthy 3-year-old spayed female
Wirehaired Fox Terrier is presented by her owners with
a concern for bloody urine. The dog had been acting fine
otherwise and the owners left this morning for work and
returned this evening and fed her as they normally do.
When they took her for a walk the dog urinated bloody
urine. There was no stranguria or pollakiuria noted. All
her other body systems are reportedly fine, and the dog is
not receiving any medications. There is no history of any
previous medical problems, and the dog has never had
any urinary problems prior to today.

26/04/16 4:48 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

Clinical examination
The dog is bright, alert, responsive, and appears clinically
well hydrated. Temperature, pulse, and respiration are all
within normal limits. Heart and lungs auscult normally
and the abdomen is soft and nonpainful. Rectal examination is unremarkable and the stool appears normal in
color and consistency. The rest of the clinical examination
was normal.

Differential diagnosis
Common causes of bloody urine in dogs and cats include
urinary tract infection, cystic calculi, renal hemorrhage,
urinary tract vascular abnormality, neoplasia, coagulopathy (including thrombocytopenia or thrombocytopathia),
trauma, and pigmenturia.

Laboratory tests
Urinalysis revealed grossly dark red urine, SG of 1.035
(RI, 1.015–1.045), and 4+ blood on a urine dipstick, but was
otherwise unremarkable. Urinary sediment examination
was also unremarkable, but the supernatant remained
dark red after centrifugation. The normal sediment and
failure of the urine supernatant to clear with centrifugation suggested that the abnormal color was consistent
with pigmenturia, most likely hemoglobinuria.
A peripheral blood PCV and a blood smear were
obtained. The PCV was within reference interval (37–55%),
but the plasma was pink colored, indicating red blood cell
hemolysis. A blood smear was performed (Figure 21.1).
The red cell morphology findings are consistent with
eccentrocytes and Heinz bodies. These are a result of oxidant injury to the red cell membranes and hemoglobin.
21.1

1123

This injury can result in hemolysis of the red cells and
subsequent hemoglobinuria.

Conclusion
The owners were asked about potential exposure to any
zinc-containing metals or onions. They remembered that
the dog had got into the trash that morning and eaten
a plateful of deep-fried onions. The case history, exposure to onions, and the red cell morphology all support
a clinical diagnosis of onion toxicity. The dog was given
supportive care with IV fluid diuresis, and monitoring
of vital signs and PCV. The PCV decreased over the first
12 hours but never dropped below 37%. She was discharged 48 hours after admission without ever needing
a blood transfusion.

CASE 22: CORAL SNAKE ENVENOMATION IN
A CAT – RACHEL B. DAVY
Signalment/history
An 8-year-old spayed female Domestic Shorthair cat
weighing 3.56 kg was presented to an emergency facility for vomiting and ataxia progressing to tetraplegia
approximately 6 hours after playing with a coral snake
in the yard.

Clinical examination
On arrival at the emergency facility, the cat was in cardiopulmonary arrest. She was intubated and CPR was
­performed for approximately 2 minutes, which resulted
in return of spontaneous circulation. On physical
examination post arrest, she was comatose, had generalized lower motor neuron paralysis, and required
manual ventilation. One vial of Coralmyn® coral snake
antivenom was slowly administered over 30 minutes,
at the end of which the cat began having an anaphylactic ­
reaction characterized by facial swelling. She
was administered epinephrine (0.03 mg/kg SC and
0.006 mg/kg IV) and ­dexamethasone sodium phosphate
(0.22 mg/kg IV). She was then transported while being
­hand-­ventilated to a referral facility and placed on a
mechanical ventilator.

Diagnostic tests

Figure 21.1 Peripheral blood smear shown stained with
Diff-Quick® (top) and new methylene blue (bottom).

K22463_Appendix.indd 1123

CBC showed a mild thrombocytopenia (139,000/µl; RI,
160,000–502,000/µl). Serum chemistry panel showed a
moderately elevated ALT (423 U/L; RI, 32–83), a moderately elevated AST (207 U/L; RI, 13–43), a moderate
hypocalcemia (7.6 mg/dl; RI, 8.2–10.4), a moderate hypophosphatemia (2.2 mg/dl; RI, 3.1–6), and a mild hyperglycemia (196 mg/dl; RI, 70–140). These findings are

26/04/16 4:48 pm

1124

Appendix Clinical cases

consistent with what has been previously reported in cats
with coral snake envenomation. In one study involving
three cats, one of the patients was hypophosphatemic, all
three patients were hypokalemic and hyperglycemic, two
had an elevated AST, and all three had an elevated creatinine kinase.

Treatment
Although normal on presentation, the cat’s sodium
fell precipitously by the third day on the ventilator.
Her sodium fell from 153 mEq/l (RI, 148–156) on day 2
to 128.8 mEq/l 24 hours later, at which point her fluid
therapy was changed from lactated Ringer’s solution to
0.9% NaCl. When her sodium continued to drop, reaching
122.9 mEq/l 9 hours later, the fluid therapy was changed
to 3% saline, which resulted in normonatremia.
Since the cat was not displaying any outward signs
of fluid overload suggesting a hypervolemic hyponatremia, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
secretion (SIADH) was suspected. The primary stimulus
for release of ADH is plasma hyperosmolality or hypovolemia. Therefore, the definition of SIADH is an excess
of ADH in the absence of hyperosmolality or hypovolemia. This leads to water retention by the kidneys and
a dilutional hyponatremia. Specifically in patients that
are receiving positive pressure ventilation, especially
in those that are on high levels of positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) ventilation, there is decreased
production of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) due to
decreased venous return. Since ANP normally inhibits
ADH secretion, a lack of ANP results in increasing levels
of ADH, thus resulting in SIADH.
When the cat’s endotracheal tube was replaced as part
of her daily care, mucopurulent exudate was noted around
the end of the tube. Cytology of this showed intracellular
rods and a culture showed scant to moderate growth of
Pasteurella multocida ssp. multocida. Antibiotics (ampicillin/sulbactam, 50 mg/kg IV q8h) were initiated after identifying bacteria on cytology. Thoracic radiographs taken
2 days later showed increased soft tissue opacities in the
left cranial and right middle lung lobes, suspected to be
secondary to atelectasis from prolonged recumbency;
however, aspiration pneumonia was not excluded.
Additional treatment consisted of pantoprazole
(1 mg/kg IV q24h). Enteral nutrition was started via nasogastric tube feedings on day 4; a metoclopramide CRI
(1 mg/kg/day IV) was also initiated at that time.
The cat remained on the ventilator for a total of
77 hours. After weaning her off mechanical ventilation,
she slowly regained normal motor function, initially
restricted to tail movements, but gradually progressing
to limb movements and eventually standing and walking

K22463_Appendix.indd 1124

the fourth day off the ventilator. She was discharged with
oral amoxicillin/clavulanate treatment for her suspected
aspiration pneumonia.

Discussion
Coral snakes belong to the family Elapidae, which also
includes cobras, mambas, kraits, brown snakes, and
tiger snakes. Geographically, the Eastern coral snake
(Micrurus fulvius fulvius) ranges from eastern North
Carolina to the southern tip of Florida and then westward to Louisiana. The venom of the Eastern coral snake
is primarily ­neurotoxic, capable of causing a lower motor
neuron paralysis and CNS depression. The venom also
has hematologic effects, causing hemolysis in dogs, but
this has not been noted in cats. This is thought to be due
to the dog’s red blood cell membrane showing greater
sensitivity to the lipoprotein lipase in the coral snake
venom. The venom causes only minimal tissue reaction
and pain. Due to the lack of tissue inflammation, it can be
initially challenging to identify which exposed, asymptomatic patients are actually envenomated. Additionally,
the time of onset of clinical signs can range from minutes
to as long as 36 hours, which makes it difficult to determine which exposed patients will develop severe signs of
envenomation. Current recommendations at our facility
for exposed pets include in-hospital monitoring for 48
hours with serial neurologic evaluations and monitoring
of serum and urine every 12 hours for evidence of hemolysis (in dogs). Antivenom should be administered at the
first sign of envenomation or before the onset of clinical
signs if the chances of being bitten were high (i.e. if the
pet was found with the snake in its mouth; Figure 22.1).

22.1

Figure 22.1 A dead Eastern Coral snake following its encounter
with a dog. Any patient having this type of close contact with a
coral snake is a candidate for antivenom treatment.

26/04/16 4:48 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

Early treatment is recommended in an attempt to avoid
the onset of respiratory paralysis and the need for ventilatory support.
Coral snake envenomation should be included in the
differential diagnosis when the geographic locale and
clinical signs are compatible with this diagnosis. Any
dog in the Southeastern USA with the combined signs of
hemolysis with lower motor neuron weakness is strongly
suspect for coral snake envenomation.

Further reading
Arce-Bejarano R, Lomonte B, Gutierrez JM (2014) Intra­
vascular hemolysis induced by the venom of the
Eastern coral snake, Micurus fulvius, in a mouse model:
identification of directly hemolytic phospholipases
A2. Toxicon 90:26–35.
Chrisman CL, Hopkins AL, Ford SL et al. (1996) Acute, flaccid
quadriplegia in three cats with suspected coral snake
envenomation. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32(4):343–349.
Perez ML, Fox K, Schaer M (2012) A retrospective evaluation
of coral snake envenomation in dogs and cats: 20 cases
(1996–2011). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 22(6):682–689.

1125

Parameter

Patient

Reference interval

Hematocrit

6.6%

35–55

Hemoglobin

2.41 g/dl

12–18

RBC count

0.74 ×1012/l

5.4–8.0

MCV

89.1 fl

65–75

MCHC

36.5 g/dl

34–37

MCH

22.5 pg

22–25

Nucleated RBCs

0.6 × 10 /l

Platelets

6 × 109/l

WBCs (corrected)

14.2 × 10 /l

5.5–17.0

Neutrophils

11.4 × 109/l

3.0–11.5

Lymphocytes

0.29 × 10 /l

0.7–3.6

Monocytes

0.57 × 109/l

0.1–1.5

Eosinophils

0.43 × 10 /l

0.2–1.4

9

170–500
9

9

9

23.1

CASE 23: IMMUNE-MEDIATED HEMOLYTIC
ANEMIA AND IMMUNE-MEDIATED
THROMBOCYTOPENIA – MICHAEL J. DAY
Signalment/history
A 3-year-old female English Cocker Spaniel had a litter of
pups several months ago and was in estrus 2 weeks ago.
The bitch is now presented with a 7-day history of weakness and lethargy. The owner reports recent intermittent
diarrhea, although at present there are no signs of this
problem.

Figure 23.1 Blood smear.

Clinical and laboratory examination

Interpretation of hematologic data

The main finding on clinical examination is pallor of the
mucous membranes. Hematologic and serum biochemical examinations are performed and the results are given
below.
Examination of the blood smear (Figure 23.1) reveals
anisocytosis ++, polychromasia ++, spherocytosis +++,
macrothrombocytes +, and 1–2 platelets per high-power
field (hpf).
The serum biochemistry profile is unremarkable apart
from mild hypoalbuminemia (25.7 g/l; RI, 32–38) with
­normal globulin concentration (33.6 g/l; RI, 20–35) and
­normal A:G ratio (0.77; RI, 0.6–1.5). There is also an elevation in total bilirubin (13.5 µmol/l; RI, 0–10 µmol/l).

The dog has a severe macrocytic, normochromic anemia.
The anemia is strongly regenerative as indicated by the
elevated MCV and the presence of nucleated erythrocytes. The presence of marked spherocytosis suggests
immune-mediated hemolysis. There is an accompanying
thrombocytopenia with evidence of regeneration (macrothrombocytes). The machine platelet count may be artificially low, but the number of platelets/hpf is subnormal
(5–10 platelets/hpf would be expected). The leukogram is
within normal limits.
The clinical history and hematologic data suggest an
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA). Although
there is no clinical evidence of hemorrhage, the presence

K22463_Appendix.indd 1125

26/04/16 4:48 pm

1126

Appendix Clinical cases

of thrombocytopenia would be consistent with concurrent immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMTP, Evans’
syndrome).

disease may have been triggered by recent estrus, which
is a recognized trigger factor for IMHA.

Other laboratory diagnostic procedures

This dog received a whole blood transfusion and was
started on combination immunosuppressive therapy
with oral prednisolone and azathioprine.

A Coombs test and (if available) testing for the presence
of antiplatelet antibody. Antinuclear antibody testing
might be considered, but was not performed in this case.
There was no evidence of cold autoagglutination of red
cells in this case. The Coombs test was positive for polyvalent canine Coombs reagent (titer 160 at 37oC and 80
at 4oC) and anti-dog IgG (titer 640 at 37oC and 320 at 4oC).
Tests for IgM and complement C3 were negative at both
temperatures. A test for antiplatelet antibody was not
available. A coagulation screen was also performed and
revealed a PT of 8.0 seconds (control 7.6 seconds), APTT of
13.8 seconds (control 14.4 seconds), and D-Dimer concentration of 0.4 mg/l (RI, 0.1–0.5).

Presumptive diagnosis
The result of the Coombs test confirms the presence
of IMHA and the presence of a warm-reactive IgG
antibody is consistent with dominant extravascular
hemolysis. In the absence of other causes for thrombocytopenia, this ­process is presumptively immune-mediated
in this case.

Further considerations that should be made in
this case
It is important to determine whether this is primary or
secondary immune-mediated disease. The following key
underlying causes should be considered:

●● Recent administration of drugs (no history in
this dog).

●● Recent administration of vaccine (no history in
this dog).

●● Infectious disease, particularly arthropod-borne
infections (e.g. Babesia, Ehrlichia, Leishmania). This
dog lives in a nonendemic area for these diseases
(the UK) and there is no history of recent travel to an
endemic area.
●● Neoplastic disease. There is no clinical or laboratory
evidence that this relatively young dog has cancer.
●● Inflammatory disease. The recent history of intermittent diarrhea and hypoalbuminemia might justify
further exploration. Inflammatory enteropathy can
underlie IMHA and IMTP in the dog.
In the absence of recognized underlying ­
factors,
it is likely that this dog has primary, idiopathic
immune-mediated disease (Evans’ syndrome). The
­

K22463_Appendix.indd 1126

Treatment

CASE 24: NUTRITIONAL MANAGEMENT –
JUSTIN SHMALBERG
Signalment/history
A 9-year-old neutered male Domestic Shorthair cat is
­presented postoperatively for nutritional management
of idiopathic chylothorax, intermittent constipation, and
anorexia.

Clinical examination
The cat was quiet and alert with normal respiratory
effort and rate. Cardiac sounds were audible and a chest
tube was present, through which moderate amounts of
serosanguineous fluid were aspirated (15–25 ml q2h).
Abdominal palpation was unremarkable and no feces
were palpated within the colon. The patient was normotensive and normothermic. The patient’s body condition
score (BCS) was 6/9 with a body mass of 6.3 kg. Concurrent
therapies included fentanyl (2 mcg/kg/hour CRI),
cefazolin (20 mg/kg IV q6h), and IV fluids (15–30 ml/hour
with rate adjusted based on hydration status).

Pertinent laboratory tests
Triglyceride concentration in thoracic fluid (preoperative) = 469 mg/dl; triglyceride concentration in serum
(preoperative) = 41 mg/dl; heartworm antibody, FeLV
antigen, FIV antibody: negative; serum chemistry: ALP =
54 U/L (RI, 10–46); total T4: within normal limits; CBC:
lymphocytes = 300/µl (RI, 2–7.2); eosinophils = 190/µl (RI,
300–1,700).

Pertinent preoperative imaging
Thoracic radiographs: severe pleural effusion with
­atelectasis and rounding of the lobar margins, consistent
with pleural fibrosis (Figure 24.1). Thoracic ultrasound:
severe pleural effusion (Figure 24.2). Echocardiogram:
­normal ­cardiac appearance and function. Thoracic CT: no
­evidence of neoplasia

Surgical intervention
No masses or structural anomalies were identified during
surgery. A subtotal pericardectomy, thoracic duct ligation,
and bilateral cranial lung lobectomy due to severe pleural
fibrosis are elected.

26/04/16 4:48 pm

Appendix Clinical cases

24.1

1127

Assessment of estimated metabolic rate
The patient is 10–15% over ideal body weight with a BCS
of 6/9. The patient’s ideal body weight is calculated as
6.3 kg/1.10, or 5.7 kg. Published equations give values for
daily caloric requirements of 230–273 kcal/day. Average
cats should receive 200–250 calories per day, so calculations and general estimates are in agreement. Illness factors are unnecessary in almost all animals.

Nutritional intervention

Figure 24.1 Initial thoracic radiograph demonstrating pleural
effusion.
24.2

Figure 24.2 Thoracic ultrasound confirming effusion.

Immediate enteral feeding is necessary given the cat’s
acute anorexia, chronic hyporexia, dramatic weight loss,
and possible biomarkers for hepatic lipidosis. A nasoesophageal tube is placed in order to avoid additional
anesthesia. Cats have higher rates of protein oxidation,
decreased downregulation of gluconeogenesis, and possibly elevated requirements during recovery. As a result, the
minimal protein requirement for cats (40 g/1,000 kcal) is
insufficient, and a higher protein diet should be selected.
Dietary fat restriction is also a goal of nutritional therapy. Long-chain triglyceride intake may increase chyle
flow. Chyle is thought to be irritating to the pleura and
could have contributed to the pleural fibrosis in this cat.
Previous reports of fat restriction in cats with chylothorax
are variable, but diets with <35 g/1,000 kcal are considered. A liquid diet is the only option for a nasoesophageal
tube. Two diets are fed to approximate the desired nutrient composition. The combined average diet contains 61 g
protein and 26 g fat per 1,000 kcal, with 1 kcal/ml. One
hundred and twenty calories are delivered in four bolus
feedings in the first 24 hours, with double that amount
given in the following 3 days. The patient’s previous dry
diet is offered before discharge, but anorexia persists.

Problem list at time of nutritional intervention

Nutritional discharge and follow up

Anorexia; lymphopenia; eosinopenia; elevated ALP;
­historical chylothorax.
Lymphopenia is a common clinical finding in cats with
chylothorax, and the eosinopenia is unlikely to be of clinical significance. ALP is liver-specific in cats and therefore
not commonly associated with stress. Cholestatic disease
is a concern, and given the patient’s signalment and presentation, hepatic lipidosis is a differential diagnosis.
Elevated ALP is a common clinical finding in affected cats
before overt clinical signs manifest. The referring veterinarian reported that the cat had decreased in weight
from 7.2 kg to 6.3 kg (12%) in the 2 months prior to presentation, which is consistent with rates in experimentally
induced lipidosis.

The patient is discharged with the recommendation to
offer both the previous diet and a high-protein, low-fat
diet containing 116 g protein and 27 g fat per 1,000 kcal to
assess voluntary intake when in a more familiar location.
The patient is presented 48 hours following discharge, as
instructed, for persistent anorexia, recurrent constipation,
and dehydration. No changes in BCS or muscle mass are
evident. Esophagostomy tube placement is recommended
to the owners, and the tube is placed using standard
techniques. Thoracic radiographs demonstrate appropriate placement and a reduction in effusion (Figures 24.3,
24.4). A canned diet is given containing 102 g protein and
25 g fat with a moderate amount of soluble fiber to provide 220 calories over four feedings. Lactulose is given to

K22463_Appendix.indd 1127

26/04/16 4:48 pm

1128

Appendix Clinical cases

24.3

increase fecal moisture and to stimulate colonic motility.
Additive water (60–80 ml after each feeding) is given the
first day to replace fluid deficit.

Recheck examination and conclusion
Nausea is reported during the week of esophagostomy
tube feedings. BCS is decreased to 5/9. A reduction in
food volume is desired, so a kitten food and powdered
enteral diet are mixed together with water, yielding a
diet with 2.6 kcal/ml and 70 g protein and 26 g fat per
1,000 kcal. Feedings are well-tolerated for the following
week and the patient begins to eat about 20 calories of
the high-protein diet recommended at discharge. The
feeding tube is removed, and monitored free-choice feeding is ­recommended. The patient consumes an average of
260 calories per day, maintains weight and body condition, and ­displays no recurrence of chylothorax. Lactulose
is discontinued and fecal quality remains normal.

Figure 24.3 Recheck thoracic radiograph demonstrating
resolution of effusion.
24.4

Figure 24.4 Thoracic radiograph after esophagostomy
tube placement demonstrating appropriate positioning.

K22463_Appendix.indd 1128

26/04/16 4:48 pm

